
Sanskrit text with Transliteration, Translation & Commentary 



Pataniali Yoga Sutras 



Commentary By 

Swami Vivekananda 







PATANJALI YOGA SUTRAS 

Sanskrit text with Translation and Commentary 



By 



Swami Vivekananda 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Contents 

INTRODUCTION 3 

CHAPTER I - SAMADHI PADA 9 

CHAPTER II - SADHANA PADA 54 

CHAPTER III - VIBHOOTI PADA 98 

CHAPTER IV - KAIVALYA PADA 123 



2 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



INTRODUCTION 



Before going into the Yoga Aphorisms I will try to discuss 
one great question, upon which the whole theory of religion 
rests, for the Yogis. It seems the consensus of opinion of the 
great minds of the world, and it has been nearly demonstrated 
by researchers into physical nature, that we are the outcome 
and manifestation of an absolute condition, back of our 
present relative condition, and are going forward, to return 
again to that absolute. This being granted, the question is, 
which is better, the absolute or this state? There are not 
wanting people who think that this manifested state is the 
highest state of man. Thinkers of great calibre are of the 
opinion that we are manifested specimens of undifferentiated 
being, and this differentiated state is higher than the absolute. 
Because in the absolute there cannot be any quality they 
imagine that it must be insensate, dull, and lifeless, that only 
this life can be enjoyed, and therefore we must cling to it. First 
of all we want to inquire into other solutions of life. There was 
an old solution that man after death remained the same, that 
all his good sides, minus his evil sides, remained forever. 
Logically stated this means that man’s goal is the world; this 
world carried a stage higher, and with elimination of its evils 
is the state they call heaven. This theory, on the face of it, is 
absurd and puerile, because it cannot be. There cannot be 
good without evil, or evil without good. To live in a world 
where all is good and no evil is what Sanskrit logicians call a 
“dream in the air.” Another theory in modern times has been 
presented by several schools, that man’s destiny is to go on 
always improving, always struggling towards, and never 

3 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



reaching, the goal. This statement, though, apparently, very 
nice, is also absurd, because there is no such thing as motion 
in a straight line. Every motion is in a circle. If you could take 
up a stone, and project it into space, and then live long 
enough, that stone would come back exactly to your hand. A 
straight line, infinitely projected, must end in a circle. 
Therefore, this idea that the destiny of man is progression ever 
forward and forward, and never stopping, is absurd. Although 
extraneous to the subject, I may remark that this idea explains 
the ethical theory that you must not hate, and must love, 
because, just as in the case of electricity, or any other force, 
the modern theory is that the power leaves the dynamo and 
completes the circle back to the dynamo. So with all forces in 
nature; they must come back to the source. Therefore do not 
hate anybody, because that force, that hatred, which comes 
out from you, must, in the long run, come back to you. If you 
love, that love will come back to you, completing the circuit. 
It is as certain as can be, that every bit of hatred that goes out 
of the heart of man comes back to him full force; nothing can 
stop it, and every impulse of love comes back to him. On 
other and practical grounds we see that the theory of eternal 
progression is untenable, for destruction is the goal of 
everything earthly. All our struggles and hopes and fears and 
joys, what will they lead to? We will all end in death. Nothing 
is so certain as this. Where, then, is this motion in a straight 
line? This infinite progression? It is only going out to a 
distance, and again coming back to the centre from which it 
started. See how, from nebulas, the sun, moon, and stars, are 
produced; then they dissolve, and go back to nebulas. The 
same is being done everywhere. The plant takes material from 
the earth, dissolves, and gives it back. Every form in this 

4 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



world is taken out of corresponding atoms and goes back to 
those atoms. 

It cannot be that the same law acts differently in different 
places. Law is uniform. Nothing is more certain than that. If 
this is the law of nature, so it is with thought; it will dissolve 
and come back to its origin; whether we will it or not we shall 
have to return to the origin, which is called God or Absolute. 
We all came from God, and we are all bound to go to God, call 
that God by any name you like; call Him God, or Absolute or 
Nature, or by any hundred names you like, the fact remains 
the same. “From whom all this universe comes out, in whom 
all that is born lives, and to whom all returns.” This is one fact 
that is certain. Nature works on the same plan; what is being 
worked out in one sphere is being worked out in millions of 
spheres. What you see with the planets, the same will it be 
with this earth, with men and with the stars. The huge wave is 
a mighty compound of small waves, it may be of millions; the 
life of the whole world is a compound of millions of little 
lives, and the death of the whole world is the compound of the 
deaths of those millions of little beings. 

Now the question arises, is going back to God the higher state, 
or is it not? The philosophers of the Yoga school answer 
emphatically that it is. They say that man’s present state is a 
degeneration; that there is no one religion on the face of the 
earth which says that man is an improvement. The idea idea as 
that his beginning is perfect and pure, that he degenerates 
until he cannot degenerate further, and that there must come a 
time when he shoots upward again to complete the circle; the 
circle must be there. However low he goes, he must ultimately 

5 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



take the upward bend again, and go back to the original 
source, which is God. Man comes from God in the 
beginning, in the middle he becomes man, and in the end he 
goes back to God. This is the method of putting it in the 
Dualistic form. In the Monistic form you say that man is God, 
and goes back to Him again. If our present state is the higher 
one, then why is there so much horror and misery, and why is 
there an end to it? If this is the higher state, why does it end? 
That which corrupts and degenerates cannot be the highest 
state. Why should it be so diabolical, so unsatisfying? It is 
only excusable, inasmuch as, through it, we are taking a 
higher groove; we have to pass through it in order to become 
regenerate again. Put a seed into the ground and it 
disintegrates, dissolves after a time, and out of that dissolution 
comes the splendid tree. Every seed must degenerate to 
become the stately tree. So it follows that the sooner we get 
out of this state we call “man” the better for us. Is it by 
commtting suicide that we get out of this state? Not at all. 
That will be making it all the worse. Torturing ourselves, or 
condemning the world, is not the way to get out. We have to 
pass through the “Slough of Despond,” and the sooner we are 
through the better. But it must always be remembered that this 
is not the highest state. 

The really difficult part to understand is that this state, the 
Absolute, which has been called the highest, is not, as some 
fear, that of the zoophite, or of the stone. That would be a 
dangerous thing to think. According to these thinkers there 
are only two states of existence, one of the stone, and the other 
of thought. What right have they to limit existence to these 
two. Is there not something infinitely superior to thought? The 

6 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



vibrations of light, when they are very low, we do not see; 
when they become a little more intense they become light to 
us; when they become still more intense we do not see them; it 
is dark to us. Is the darkness in the end the same as in the 
beginning? Certainly not; it is the difference of the two poles. 
Is the thoughtlessness of the stone the same as the 
thoughtlessness of God? Certainly not. God does not think; 
He does not reason; why should He? Is anything unknown to 
Him, that He should reason? The stone cannot reason; God 
does not. Such is the difference. These philosophers think it is 
awful if we go beyond thought; they find nothing beyond 
thought. 

There are much higher states of existence beyond reasoning. 
It is really beyond the intellect that the first stage of religious 
life is to be found. When you step beyond thought and 
intellect and all reasoning, then you have made the first step 
towards God; and that is the beginning of life. This that is 
commonly called life is but an embryo state. 

The next question will be, what proof is there that this state 
beyond thought and reasoning is the highest state? In the first 
place, all the great men of the world, much greater than those 
that only talk, men who moved the world, men who never 
thought of any selfish ends whatever, have declared that this 
is but a little stage on the way, that the Infinite is beyond. In 
the second place, they not only say so, but lay it open to 
everyone, they leave their methods, and all can follow in their 
steps. In the third place, there is no other way left. There is no 
other explanation. Taking for granted that there is no higher 
state, why are we going through this circle all the time; what 

7 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



reason can explain the world? The sensible will be the limit to 
our knowledge if we cannot go farther, if we must not ask for 
anything more. This is what is called agnosticism. But what 
reason is there to believe in the testimony of the senses? I 
would call that man a true agnostic who would stand still in 
the street and die. If reason is all in all it leaves us no place to 
stand on this side of nihilism. If a man is agnostic of 
everything but money, fame and name, he is only a fraud. 
Kant has proved beyond all doubt that we cannot penetrate 
beyond the tremendous dead wall called reason. But that is the 
very first idea upon which all Indian thought takes its stand, 
and dares to seek, and succeeds in finding something higher 
than reason, where alone the explanation of the present state is 
to be found. This is the value of the study of something that 
will take us beyond the world. “Thou art our Father, and wilt 
take us to the other shore of this ocean of ignorance;” that is 
the science of religion; nothing else can be. 



8 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



CHAPTER I - SAMADHI PADA 

CONCENTRATION: ITS SPIRITUAL USES 



II WU II 



1. 3W#TT^IRmil ?ll 

atha yoganushasanam 

Now concentration is explained. 

2. II R II 

yogashchittavrittinirodhah 

Yoga is restraining the mind-stuff (Chitta) from 
taking various forms (Vrttis) 

A good deal of explanation is necessary here. We have to 
understand what Chitta is, and what are these Vrttis. I have 
this eye. Eyes do not see. Take away the brain centre which is 
in the head, the eyes will still be there, the retinas complete, 
and also the picture, and yet the eyes will not see. So the eyes 
are only a secondary instrument, not the organ of vision. The 
organ of vision is in the nerve centre of the brain. The two 
eyes will not be sufficient alone. Sometimes a man is asleep 
with his eyes open. The light is there and the picture is there, 
but a third thing is necessary; mind must be joined to the 
organ. The eye is the external instrument, we need also the 
brain centre and the agency of the mind. Carriages roll down a 



9 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



street and you do not hear them. Why? Because your mind has 
not attached itself to the organ of hearing. First there is the 
instrument, then there is the organ, and third, the mind 
attachment to these two. The mind takes the impression 
farther in, and presents it to the determinative 
faculty — Buddhi — which reacts. Along with this reaction 
flashes the idea of egoism. Then this mixture of action and 
reaction is presented to the PuruSa, the real Soul, who 
perceives an object in this mixture. The organs ( Indriyas ), 
together with the mind {Manas), the determinative faculty 
( Buddhi ) and egoism ( Ahamkara ), form the group called the 
Antahkarana (the internal instrument). They are but various 
processes in the mind-stuff, called Chitta. The waves of 
thought in the Chitta are called Vrtti (“the whirlpool” is the 
literal translation). What is thought? Thought is a force, as is 
gravitation or repulsion. It is absorbed from the infinite 
storehouse of force in nature; the instrument called Chitta 
takes hold of that force, and, when it passes out at the other 
end it is called thought. This force is supplied to us through 
food, and out of that food the body obtains the power of 
motion, etc. Others, the finer forces, it throws out in what we 
call thought. Naturally we see that the mind is not 
intelligent; yet it appears to be intelligent. Why? Because the 
intelligent soul is behind it. You are the only sentient being; 
mind is only the instrument through which you catch the 
external world. Take this book; as a book it does not exist 
outside, what exists outside is unknown and unknowable. It is 
the suggestion that gives a blow to the mind, and the mind 
gives out the reaction. If a stone is thrown into the water the 
water is thrown against it in the form of waves. The real 
universe is the occasion of the reaction of the mind. A book 

10 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



form, or an elephant form, or a man form, is not outside; all 
that we know is our mental reaction from the outer 
suggestion. Matter is the “permanent possibility of 
sensation,” said John Stuart Mill. It is only the suggestion that 
is outside. Take an oyster for example. You know how pearls 
are made. A grain of sand or something gets inside and begins 
to irritate it, and the oyster throws a sort of enameling around 
the sand, and this makes the pearl. This whole universe is our 
own enamel, so to say, and the real universe is the grain of 
sand. The ordinary man will never understand it, because, 
when he tries to, he throws out an enamel, and sees only his 
own enamel. Now we understand what is meant by these 
Vrttis. The real man is behind the mind, and the mind is the 
instrument in his hands, and it is his intelligence that is 
percolating through it. It is only when you stand behind it that 
it becomes intelligent. When man gives it up it falls to pieces, 
and is nothing. So you understand what is meant by Chitta. It 
is the mind-stuff, and Vrttis are the waves and ripples rising in 
it when external causes impinge on it. These Vrttis are our 
whole universe. 

The bottom of the lake we cannot see, because its surface is 
covered with ripples. It is only possible when the rippled have 
subsided, and the water is calm, for us to catch a glimpse of 
the bottom. If the water is muddy, the bottom will not be seen; 
if the water is agitated all the time, the bottom will not be 
seen. If the water is clear, and there are no waves, we shall see 
the bottom. That bottom of the lake is our own true Self; the 
lake is the Chitta, and the waves are the Vrttis. Again, this 
mind is in three states; one is darkness, which is called Tamas, 



11 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



just as in brutes and idiots; it only acts to injure others. No 
other idea comes into that state of mind. Then there is the 
active state of mind, Rajas, whose chief motives are power 
and enjoyment. “I will be powerful and rule others.” Then, 
at last, when the waves cease, and the water of the lake 
becomes clear, there is the state called Sattva, serenity, 
calmness. It is not inactive, but rather intensely active. It is the 
greatest manifestation of power to be calm. It is easy to be 
active. Let the reins go, and the horses will drag you down. 
Anyone can do that, but he who can stop the plunging horses 
is the strong man. Which requires the greater strength, letting 
go, or restraining? The calm man is not the man who is dull. 
You must not mistake Sattva for dullness, or laziness. The 
calm man is the one who has restraint of these waves. Activity 
is the manifestation of the lower strength, calmness of the 
superior strength. 

This Chitta is always trying to get back to its natural pure 
state, but the organs draw it out. To restrain it, and to check 
this outward tendency, and to start it on the return journey to 
that essence of intelligence is the first step in Yoga, because 
only in this way can the Chitta get into its proper course. 

Although this Chitta is in every animal, from the lowest to the 
highest, it is only in the human form that we find intellect, and 
until the mind-stuff can take the form of intellect it is not 
possible for it to return through all these steps, and liberate the 
soul. Immediate salvation is impossible for the cow and the 
dog, although they have mind, because their Chitta cannot as 
yet take that form which we call intellect. 



12 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Chitta manifests itself in all these different forms - scattering, 
darkening, weakening, and concentrating. These are the four 
states in which the mind-stuff manifests itself. First a 
scattered form, is activity. Its tendency is to manifest in the 
form of pleasure or of pain. Then the dull form is darkness, 
the only tendency of which is to injure others. The 
commentator says the first form is natural to the Devas, the 
angels, and the second is the demoniacal form. The Ekagra, 
the concentrated form of the Chitta, is what brings us to 
Samadhi. 

3. cT^T 3g: II X II 

tada drashtuh svaroope avasthanam 

At that time (the time of concentration) the seer (the 
PuraSa ) rests in his own (unmodified) state. 

As soon as the waves have stopped, and the lake has become 
quiet, we see the ground below the lake. So with the mind; 
when it is calm, we see what our own nature is; we do not mix 
ourself but remain our own selves. 

4. II V II 

vrittisaroopyam itaratra 

At other times (other than that of concentration) the 
seer is identified with the modifications. 

For instance, I am in a state of sorrow; someone blames me; 
this is a modification, Vrtti, and I identify myself with it, and 



13 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the result is misery. 

5. Tdd^-C %2I 3U1ET: II H II 

vrittayah pangchatayyah klishta aklishtah 

There are five classes of modification, painful and not 
painful. 

6. M^luiNMddN^MslI^idd: II \ II 

pramannaviparyayavikalpanidrasmritayah 

(These are) right knowledge, indiscrimination, verbal 
delusion, sleep, and memory. 

7. 5fr^ld,dMMdi: 5FTMTR II « II 

pratyakshanumanagamah pramanani 

Direct perception, inference, and competent 
evidence, are proofs. 

When two of our perceptions do not contradict each other we 
call it proof. I hear something, and, if it contradicts something 
already perceived, I begin to fight it out, and do not believe it. 
There are also three kinds of proof. Direct perception, 
Pratyaksham, whatever we see and feel, is proof, if there has 
been nothing to delude the senses. 1 see the world; that is 
sufficient proof that it exists. Secondly, Anumana, inference; 
you see a sign, and from the sign you come to the thing 
signified. Thirdly, Aptavakyam, the direct perception of the 
Yogi, of those who have seen the truth. We are all of us 

14 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



struggling towards knowledge, but you and I have to struggle 
hard, and come to knowledge through a long tedious process 
of reasoning, but the Yogi, the pure one, has gone beyond all 
this. Before his mind, the past, the present, and the future, are 
alike one book for him to read; he does not require to go 
through all this tedious process, and his words are proofs, 
because he sees knowledge in himself; he is the Omniscient 
One. These, for instance, are the authors of the Sacred 
Scriptures; therefore the Scriptures are proof, and, if any such 
persons are living now, their words will be proof. Other 
philosophers go into long discussions about this Apta, and 
they say, what is the proof that this is truth? The proof is 
because they see it; because whatever I see is proof, and 
whatever you see is proof, if it does not contradict any past 
knowledge. There is knowledge beyond the senses, and 
whenever it does not contradict reason and past human 
experience, that knowledge is proof. Any madman may come 
into this room and say that he sees angels around him, that 
would not be proof. In the first place it must be true 
knowledge, and, secondly, it must not contradict knowledge 
of the past, and thirdly, it must depend upon the character of 
the man. I hear it said that the character of the man is not of so 
much importance as what he may say; we must first hear what 
he says. This may be true in other things; a man may be 
wicked, and yet make an astronomical discovery, but in 
religion it is different, because no impure man will ever have 
the power to reach the truths of religion. Therefore, we have 
first of all to see that the man who declares himself to be an 
Apta is a perfectly unselfish and holy person; secondly that he 
has reached beyond the senses, and thirdly that what he says 
does not contradict the past knowledge of humanity. Any new 

15 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



discovery of truth does not contradict the past truth, but fits 
into it. And, fourthly, that truth must have a possibility of 
verification. If a man says “I have seen a vision,” and tells me 
that I have no right to see it, I believe him not. Everyone must 
have the power to see it for himself. No one who sells his 
knowledge is an Apt a. All these conditions must be fulfilled; 
you must first see that the man is pure, and that he has no 
selfish motive; that he has no thirst for gain or fame. 
Secondly, he must show that he is super-conscious. Thirdly, 
he must have given us something that we cannot get from our 
senses, and which is for benefit of the world. And we must see 
that it does not contradict other truths; if it contradicts other 
scientific truths reject it at once. Fourthly, the man should 
never be singular; he should only represent what all men can 
attain. The three sorts of proof, are, then, direct sense 
perception, inference, and the words of an Apta. I cannot 
translate this word into English. It is not the word inspired, 
because that comes from outside, while this comes from 
himself. The literal meaning is “attained.” 



8. fwt 




II c\\ 



viparyayo mithyajnanam atadroopapratishtham 

Indiscrimination is false knowledge not established in 
real nature. 



The next class of Vrttis that arise is mistaking the one thing for 
another, as a piece of mother-of-pearl is taken for a piece of 
silver. 



16 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



9. SK^IHlTjHId) T^q: II %\\ 

shabdajnaananupati vastushoonyo vikalpah 

Verbal delusion follows from words having no 
(corresponding) reality. 

There is another class of Vrttis called Vikalpa. A word is 
uttered, and we do not wait to consider its meaning; we jump 
to a conclusion immediately. It is the sign of weakness of the 
Chitta. Now you can understand the theory of restraint. The 
weaker the man the less he has of restraint. Consider 
yourselves always in that way. When you are going to be 
angry or miserable, reason it out, how it is that some news that 
has come to you is throwing your mind into Vrttis. 

10. STHMMc^l^HHI fTrTT% II Ml 

abhavapratyayalambana vrittirnidra 

Sleep is a Vrtti which embraces the feeling of 
voidness. 

The next class of Vrttis is called sleep and dream. When we 
awake we know that we have been sleeping; we can only have 
memory of perception. That which we do not perceive we 
never can have any memory of. Every reaction is a wave in 
the lake. Now, if, during sleep, the mind has no waves, it 
would have no perceptions, positive or negative, and, 
therefore, we would not remember them. The very reason of 
our remembering sleep is that during sleep there was a certain 
class of waves in the mind. Memory is another class of Vrttis , 



17 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



which is called Smrti. 

11. FJRT: II U II 

anubhootavishayasanpramoshah smritih 

Memory is when the (Vrttis of) perceived subjects do 
not slip away (and through impressions come back to 
consciousness). 

Memory can be caused by the previous three. For instance, 
you hear a word. That word is like a stone thrown into the lake 
of the Chitta', it causes a ripple, and that ripple rouses a series 
of ripples; this is memory. So in sleep. When the peculiar 
kind of ripple called sleep throws the Chitta into a ripple of 
memory it is called a dream. Dream is another form of the 
ripple which in the waking state is called memory. 

12. II ?RII 

abhyasavairagyabhyan tannirodhah 

Their control is by practice and non-attachment. 

The mind, to have this non-attachment, must be clear, good 
and rational. Why should we practice? Because each action is 
like the pulsations quivering over the surface of the lake. The 
vibration dies out, and what is left? The Samsharas, the 
impressions. When a large number of these impressions is left 
on the mind they coalesce, and become a habit. It is said 
“habit is second nature;” it is first nature also, and the whole 
nature of man; everything that we are, is the result of habit. 
That gives us consolation, because, if it is only habit, we can 

18 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



make and unmake it at any time. The Samshara is left by 
these vibrations passing out of our mind, each one of them 
leaving its result. Our character is the sum-total of these 
marks, and according as some particular wave prevails one 
takes that tone. If good prevail one becomes good, if 
wickedness one wicked, if joyfulness one becomes happy. 
The only remedy for bad habits is counter habits; all the bad 
habits that have left their impressions are to be controlled by 
good habits. Go on doing good, thinking holy thoughts 
continuously; that is the only way to suppress base 
impressions. Never say any man is hopeless, because he only 
represents a character, a bundle of habits, and these can be 
checked by new and better ones. Character is repeated habits, 
and repeated habits alone can reform character. 

13. ^ T^RTf ^TTS^nrf: II l\W 

tatra sthitau yatno abhyasah 

Continuous struggle to keep them (the Vrttis) 
perfectly restrained is practice. 

What is this practice? The attempt to restrain the mind in the 
Chitta form, to prevent its going out into waves. 

14. ^ rj II ?*ll 

sa tu dirghakalanairantaryasatkarasevito dridha 
-bhoomih 

Its ground becomes firm by long, constant efforts 
with great love (for the end to be attained). 



19 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Restraint does not come in one day, but by long continued 
practice. 

is. ii mi 

drishtanushravikavishayavitrishnnasy vashikara 
samjna vairagyam 

That effort, which comes to those who have given up 
their thirst after objects either seen or heard, and 
which wills to control the objects, is non-attachment. 

Two motives of our actions are (1) What we see ourselves; (2) 
The experience of others. These two forces are throwing the 
mind, the lake, into various waves. Renunciation is the power 
of battling against these, and holding the mind in check. 
Renunciation of these two motives is what we want. 1 am 
passing through a street, and a man comes and takes my 
watch. That is my own experience. I see it myself, and it 
immediately throws my China into a wave, taking the form of 
anger. Allow that not to come. If you cannot prevent that, you 
are nothing; if you can, you have Vairagyam. Similarly, the 
experience of the worldly-minded teaches us that sense 
enjoyments are the highest ideal. These are tremendous 
temptations. To deny them, and not allow the mind to come 
into a wave form with regard to them is renunciation; to 
control the twofold motive powers arising from my own 
experience, and from the experience of others, and thus 
prevent the China from being governed by them, is 
Vairagyam. These should be controlled by me, and not I by 
them. This sort of mental strength is called renunciation. This 
Vairagyam is the only way to freedom. 

20 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



16 . cTcTT II ?«UI 

tatparan purushakhyatergunnavaitrishnyam 
That extreme non-attachment, giving up even the 
qualities, shows (the real nature of) the PuruSa. 

It is the highest manifestation of power when it takes away 
even our attraction towards the qualities. We have first to 
understand what the PuruSa, the Self, is, and what are the 
qualities. According to Yoga philosophy the whole of nature 
consists of three qualities; one is called Tamas, another Rajas 
and the third Sattva. These three qualities manifest 
themselves in the physical world as attraction, repulsion, and 
control. Everything that is in nature, all these manifestations, 
are combinations and recombinations of these three forces. 
This nature has been divided into various categories by the 
Sankhyas ; the Self of man is beyond all these, beyond nature, 
is effulgent by Its very nature. It is pure and perfect. 
Whatever of intelligence we see in nature is but the reflection 
from this Self upon nature. Nature itself is insentient. You 
must remember that the word nature also includes the mind; 
mind is in nature; thought is in nature; from thought, down to 
the grossest form of matter, everything is in nature, the 
manifestation of nature. This nature has covered the Self of 
man, and when nature takes away the covering the Self 
becomes unveiled, and appears in Its own glory. This 
non-attachment, as it is described in Aphorism 15 (as being 
control of nature) is the greatest help towards manifesting the 
Self. The next aphorism defines Samadhi, perfect 
concentration, which is the goal of the Yogi. 



21 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



17. II ?vs|| 

vitarkavicharanandasmitaroopanugamat 

sanprajnatah 

The concentration called right know -ledge is that 
which is followed by reasoning, discrimination, bliss, 
unqualified ego. 

This Samadhi is divided into two varieties. One is called the 
Samprcijnata, and the other the Asamprajnata. The 
Samprajnata is of four varieites. In this Samadhi come all the 
powers of controlling nature. The first variety is called the 
Savitarka, when the mind meditates upon an object again and 
again, by isolating it from other objects. There are two sorts of 
objects for meditation, the categories of nature, and the 
PuruSa. Again, the categories are of two varieties; the 
twenty-four categories are insentient, and the one sentient is 
the PuruSa. When the mind thinks of the elements of nature 
by thinking of their beginning and their end, this is one sort of 
Savitarka. The words require explanation. This part of Yoga is 
based entirely on Sankhya Philosophy, about which I have 
already told you. As you will remember, egoism and will, and 
mind, have a common basis, and that common basis is called 
the Chitta , the mind-stuff, out of which they are all 
manufactured. This mind-stuff takes in the forces of nature, 
and projects them as thought. There must be something, 
again, where both force and matter are one. This is called 
Avyaktam, the unmanifested state of nature, before creation, 
and two which, after the end of a cycle, the whole of nature 
returns, to again come out after another period. Beyond that is 



22 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the PuruSa, the essence of intelligence. There is no liberation 
in getting powers. It is a worldly search after enjoyment in 
this life; all search for enjoyment is vain; this is the old, old 
lesson which man finds it so hard to learn. When he does learn 
it, he gets out of the universe and becomes free. The 
possession of what are called occult powers is only 
intensifying the world, and in the end intensifying suffering. 
Though, as a scientist, Patanjali is bound to point out the 
possibilities of this science, he never misses an opportunity to 
warn us against these powers. Knowledge is power, and as 
soon as we begin to know a thing we get power over it; so 
also, when the mind begins to meditate on the different 
elements it gains power over them. That sort of meditation 
where the external gross elements are the objects is called 
Savitarka. Tarka means question, Savitarka with-question. 
Questioning the elements, as it were, that they may give up 
their truths and their powers to the man who meditates upon 
them. Again, in the very same meditation, when one struggles 
to take the elements out of time and space, and think of them 
as they are, it is called Nirvitarka , without-question. When 
the meditation goes a step higher, and takes the Tanmatras as 
its object, and thinks of them as in time and space, it is called 
Savichara, with-discrimination, and when the same 
meditation gets beyond time and space, and thinks of the fine 
elements as they are, it is called Nirvichara, 
without-discrimination. The next step is when the elements 
are given up, either as gross or as fine, and the object of 
meditation is the interior organ, the thinking organ, and when 
the thinking organ is thought of as bereft of the qualities of 
activity, and of dullness, it is then called Sanandam, the 
blissful Samadhi. In that Samadhi, when we are thinking of 

23 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the mind as the object of meditation, before we have reached 
the state which takes us beyond the mind even, when it has 
become very ripe and concentrated, when all ideas of the 
gross materials, or fine materials, have been given up, and the 
only object is the mind as it is, when the Sattva state only of 
the Ego remains, but differentiated from all other objects, this 
is called Asmita Samadhi, and the man who has attained to 
this has attained to what is called in the Vedas “bereft of 
body.” He can think of himself as without his gross body; but 
he will have to think of himself as with a fine body. Those that 
in this state get merged in nature without attaining the goal are 
called Prakrtilayas, but those who do not even stop at any 
enjoyments, reach the goal, which is freedom. 




'■N 




: II ^11 



viramapratyayabhyasapoorvah sanskarashesho 
anyah 



There is another Samadhi which is attained by the 
constant practice of cessation of all mental activity, in 
which the China retains only the unmanifested 
impressions. 



This is the perfect superconscious Asamprajnata Samadhi, 
the state which gives us freedom. The first state does not 
give us freedom, does not liberate the soul. A man may attain 
to all powers, and yet fall again. There is no safeguard until 
the soul goes beyond nature, and beyond conscious 
concentration. It is very difficult to attain, although its method 
seems very easy. Its method is to hold the mind as the object, 
and whenever through comes, to strike it down, allowing no 

24 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



thought to come into the mind, thus making it an entire 
vacuum. When we can really do this, in that moment we shall 
attain liberation. When persons without training and 
preparation try to make their minds vacant they are likely to 
succeed only in covering themselves with Tamas, material of 
ignorance, which makes the mind dull and stupid, and leads 
them to think that they are making a vacuum of the mind. To 
be able to really do that is a manifestation of the greatest 
strength, of the highest control. When this state, 
Asamprajnata, super-consciousness, is reached, the Samadhi 
becomes seedless. What is meant by that? In that sort of 
concentration when there is consciousness, where the mind 
has succeeded only in quelling the waves in the Chitta and 
holding them down, they are still there in the form of 
tendencies, and these tendencies (or seeds) will become 
waves again, when the time comes. But when you have 
destroyed all these tendencies, almost destroyed the mind, 
then it has become seedless, there are no more seeds in the 
mind out of which to manufacture again and again this plant 
of life, this ceaseless round of birth and death. You may ask, 
what state would that be, in which we should have no 
knowledge? What we call knowledge is a lower state than the 
one beyond knowledge. You must always bear in mind that 
the extremes look very much the same. The low vibration of 
light is darkness, and the very high vibration of light is 
darkness also, but one is real darkness, and the other is really 
intense light; yet their appearance is the same. So, ignorance 
is the lowest state, knowledge is the middle state, and beyond 
knowledge is a still higher state. Knowledge itself is a 
manufactured something, a combination; it is not reality. 
What will be the result of constant practice of this higher 

25 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



concentration? All old tendencies of restlessness, and 
dullness, will be destroyed, as well as the tendencies of 
goodness too. It is just the same as with the metals that are 
used with gold to take off the dirt and alloy. When the ore is 
smelted down, the dross is burnt along with the alloy. So this 
constant controlling power will stop the previous bad 
tendencies and, eventually, the good ones also. Those good 
and evil tendencies will suppress each other, and there will 
remain the Soul, in all its glorious splendour, untrammelled 
by either good or bad, and that Soul is omnipresent, 
omnipotent, and omniscient. By giving up all powers it has 
become omnipotent, by giving up all life it is beyond 
mortality; it has become life itself. Then the Soul will know It 
neither had birth nor death, neither want of heaven nor of 
earth. It will know that It neither came nor went; it was nature 
which was moving, and that movement was reflected upon 
the Soul. The form of the light is moving, it is reflected and 
cast by the camera upon the wall, and the wall foolishly thinks 
it is moving. So with all of us: it is the China constantly 
moving, manipulating itself into various forms, and we think 
that we are these various forms. All these delusions will 
vanish. When that free Soul will command — not pray or beg, 
but command — then whatever It desires will be immediately 
fulfilled; whatever It wants It will be able to do. According to 
the Sankhya Philosophy there is no God. It says that there 
cannot be any God of this universe, because if there were He 
must be a Soul, and a Soul must be one of two things, either 
bound or free. How can the soul that is bound by nature, or 
controlled by nature, create? It is itself a slave. On the other 
hand, what business has the soul that is free to create and 
manipulate all these things? It has no desires, so cannot have 

26 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



any need to create. Secondly, it says the theory of God is an 
unnecessary one; nature explains all. What is the use of any 
God? But Kapila teaches that there are many souls, who, 
through nearly attaining perfection, fall short because they 
cannot perfectly renounce all powers. Their minds for a time 
merge in nature, to re-emerge as its masters. We shall all 
become such gods, and, according to the Sankhyas, the God 
spoken of in the Vedas really means one of these free souls. 
Beyond them there is not an eternally free and blessed Creator 
of the universe. On the other hand the Yogis say, “Not so, 
there is a God; there is one Soul separate from all other souls, 
and He is the eternal Master of all creation, the Ever Free, the 
Teacher of all teachers.” The Yogis admit that those the 
Sankhyas called “merged in nature” also exist. They are Yogis 
who have fallen short of perfection, and though, for a time 
debarred from attaining the goal, remain as rulers of parts of 
the universe. 

19 . II ?^ll 

bhavapratyayo videhaprakritilayanam 

(This Samadhi, when not followed by extreme 
non-attachment) becomes the cause of the 
re-manifestation of the gods and of those that become 
merged in nature. 

The gods in the Indian systems represent certain high offices 
which are being filled successively by various souls. But 
none of them is perfect. 



27 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



20. V 4} INM^II <{4* II II 

shraddhaviryasmritisamadhiprajnapoorvaka 

itaresham 

To others (this Samadhi) comes through faith, 
energy, memory, concentration, and discrimination 
of the real. 

These are they who do not want the position of gods, or even 
that of rulers of cycles. They attain to liberation. 

21. II R? II 

tivrasanveganam aasannah 

Success is speeded for the extremely energetic. 

22. Mr: II RR II 

mridumadhyadhimatratvat tatopi visheshah 
They again differ according as the means are mild, 
medium or supreme. 

23. II RXII 

eeshvarapranidhanad va 
Or by devotion to Isvara. 



24. ^I+4NHI^I^N<H<I^: fw II RVII 

kleshakarmavipakashayairaparamrishtah 
purushavishesh eeshvarah 



28 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Isvara (the Supreme Ruler) is a special PuruSa, 
untouched by misery, the results of actions, or 
desires. 

We must again remember that this Patanjali Yoga Philosophy 
is based upon that of the Sankhyas, only that in the latter there 
is no place for God, while with the Yogis God has a place. The 
Yogis, however, avoid many ideas about God, such as 
creating. God as the Creator of the Universe is not meant by 
the Isvara of the Yogis, although, according to the Vedas, 
Isvara is the Creator of the universe. Seeing that the universe 
is harmonious, it must be the manifestation of one will. The 
Yogis and Sankhyas both avoid the question of creation. The 
Yogis want to establish a God, but carefully avoid this 
question; they do not raise it at all. Yet you will find that they 
arrive at God in a peculiar fashion of their own. They say: 

25. cf=T HikRN II ^ II 

tatra niratishayan sarvajntvabijam 

In Him becomes infinite that all-knowing-ness which 
in others is (only) a germ. 

The mind must always travel between two extremes. You can 
think of limited space, but the very idea of that gives you also 
unlimited space. Close your eyes and think of a little space, 
and at the same time that you perceive the little circle, you 
have a circle round it of unlimited dimensions. It is the same 
with time. Try to think of a second, you will have, with the 
same act of perception, to think of time which is unlimited. 
So with knowledge. Knowledge is only a germ in man, but 

29 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



you will have to think of infinite knowledge around it, so that 
the very nature of your constitution shows us that there is 
unlimited knowledge, and the Yogis call that unlimited 
knowledge God. 

26 . H II II 

sa poorvesham api guruh kalenanavachchhedat 

He is the Teacher of even the ancient teachers, being 
not limited by time. 

It is true that all knowledge is within ourselves, but this has to 
be called forth by another knowledge. Although the capacity 
to know is inside us, it must be called out, and that calling out 
of knowledge can only be got, a Yogi maintains, through 
another knowledge. Dead, insentient matter, never calls out 
knowledge. It is the action of knowledge that brings out 
knowledge. Knowing beings must be with us to call forth 
what is in us, so these teachers were always necessary. The 
world was never without them, and no knowledge can come 
without them. God is the Teacher of all teachers, because 
these teachers, however great they may have been — gods or 
angels — were all bound and limited by time, and God is not 
limited by time. These are the two peculiar distinctions of the 
Yogis. The first is that in thinking of the limited, the mind 
must think of the unlimited, and that if one part of the 
perception is true the other must be, for the reason that their 
value as perceptions of the mind is equal. The very fact that 
man has a little knowledge, shows that God has unlimited 
knowledge. If I am to take one, why not the other? Reason 
forces me to take both or reject both. It I believe that there is a 



30 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



man with a little knowledge, I must also admit that there is 
someone behind him with unlimited knowledge. The second 
deduction is that no knowledge can come without a teacher. It 
is true as the modern philosophers say, that there is something 
in man which evolves out of him; all knowledge is in man, but 
certain environments are necessary to call it out. We cannot 
find any knowledge without teacher, if there are men teachers, 
god teachers, or angel teachers, they are all limited; who was 
the teacher before them? We are forced to admit, as a last 
conclusion. One Teacher, Who is not limited by time, and that 
One Teacher or infinite knowledge, without beginning or end, 
is called God. 

27. II Rvs II 

tasya vachakah prannavah 
His manifesting word is Om. 

Every idea that you have in the mind has a counterpart in a 
word; the word and the thought are inseparable. The external 
part of the thought is what we call word, and the internal part 
is what we call thought. No man can, by analysis, separate 
thought from word. The idea that language was created by 
men — certain men sitting together and deciding on words, has 
been proved to be wrong. So long as things have existed there 
have been words and language. What is the connection 
between an idea and a word? Although we see that there must 
always be a word with a thought, it is not necessary that the 
same thought requires the same word. The thought may be the 
same in twenty different countries, yet the language is 
different. We must have a word to express each thought, but 



31 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



these words need not necessarily have the same sound. 
Sounds will vary in different nations. Our commentator says 
“Although the relation between thought and word is perfectly 
natural, yet it does not mean a rigid connection between one 
sound and one idea.” These sounds vary, yet the relation 
between the sounds and the thoughts is a natural one. The 
connection between thoughts and sounds is good only if there 
be a real connection between the thing signified and the 
symbol, and until then that symbol will never come into 
general use. Symbol is the manifestor of the thing signified, 
and if the thing signified has already existence, and if, by 
experience, we know that the symbol has expressed that thing 
many times, then we are sure that there is the real relation 
between them. Even if the things are not present, there will be 
thousands who will know them by their symbols. There must 
be a natural connection between the symbol and the thing 
signified; then, when that symbol is pronounced, it recalled 
the thing signified. The commentator says the manifesting 
word of God is Om. Why does he emphasise this? There are 
hundreds of words for God. One thought is connected with a 
thousand words; the idea, God, is connected with hundreds of 
words, and each one stands as a symbol for God. Very good. 
But there must be a generalisation among all these words, 
some substratum, some common ground of all these symbols, 
and that symbol which is the common symbol will be the best, 
and will really be the symbol of all. In making a sound we use 
the larynx, and the palate as a sounding board. Is there any 
material sound of which all other sounds must be 
manifestations, one which is the most natural sound? Om 
( Aum ) is such a sound, the basis of all sounds. The first letter, 
A, is the root sound, the key, pronounced without touching 

32 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



any part of the tongue or palate; M represents the last sound in 
the series, being produced by the closed lip, and the U rolls 
from the very root to the end of the sounding board of the 
mouth. Thus, Om represents the whole phenomena of sound 
producing. As such, it must be the natural symbol, the 
matrix of all the variant sounds. It denotes the whole range 
and possibility of all the words that can be made. Apart from 
these speculations we see that around this word Om are 
centred all the different religious ideas in India; all the various 
religious ideas of the Vedas have gathered themselves round 
this word Om. What has that to do with America and England, 
or any other country? Simply that the word has been retained 
at every stage of religious growth in India, and it has been 
manipulated to mean all the various ideas about God. 
Monists, Dualists, Mono-Dualists, Separatists, and even 
Atheists, took up this Om. Om has become the one symbol for 
the religious aspiration of the vast majority of human beings. 
Take, for instance, the English word God. It conveys only a 
limited function, and if you go beyond it, you have to add 
adjectives, to make it Personal, or Impersonal, or Absolute 
God. So with the words for God in every other language; their 
signification is very small. This word Om, however, has 
around it all the various significances. As such it should be 
accepted by everyone. 

28 . II ^ II 

tajjapastadarthabhavanam 

The repetition of this (Om) and meditating on its 
meaning (is the way). 



33 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Why should there be repetition? We have not forgotten that 
theory of Samskaras, that the sum-total of impressions lives 
in the mind. Impressions live in the mind, the sum-total of 
impressions, and they become more and more latent, but 
remain there, and as soon as they get the right stimulus they 
come out. Molecular vibration will never cease. When this 
universe is destroyed all the massive vibrations disappear, the 
sun, moon, stars, and earth, will melt down, but the vibrations 
must remain in the atoms. Each atom will perform the same 
function as the big worlds do. So the vibrations of this Chitta 
will subside, but will go on like molecular vibrations, and 
when they get the impulse will come out again. We can now 
understand what is meant by repetition. It is the greatest 
stimulus that can be given to the spiritual Samskaras. “One 
moment of company with the Holy makes a ship to cross this 
ocean of life.” Such is the power of association. So this 
repetition of Om, and thinking of its meaning, is keeping good 
company in your own mind. Study, and then meditate and 
meditate, when you have studied. The light will come to you, 
the Self will become manifest. 

But one must think of this Om, and of its meaning too. Avoid 
evil company, because the scars of old wounds are in you, and 
this evil company is just the heat that is necessary ot call them 
out. In the same way we are told that good company will call 
out the good impressions that are in us, but which have 
become latent. There is nothing holier in this world than to 
keep good company, because the good impressions will have 
this same tendency to come to the surface. 



34 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



29. cTcfi II II 

tatah pratyakchetanadhigamopyantarayabhavashch 

From that is gain (the knowledge of) introspection, 
and the destruction of obstacles. 

The first manifestation of this repetition and thinking of Om 
will be that the introspective power will be manifested more 
and more, and all the mental and physical obstacles will begin 
to vanish. What are the obstacles to the Yogil 

30. ^fTF! <TcRRTFd M I c!> - 

II \°\\ 

vyadhistyanasanshayapramadalasyaviratibhrantidar 

shanalabdhabhoomikatvanavasthitatvani 

chittavikshepastentarayah 

Disease, mental laziness, doubt, calmness, cessation, 
false perception, non-attaining concentration, and 
falling away from the state when obtained, are the 
obstructing distractions. 

Disease. This body is the boat which will carry us to the other 
shore of the ocean of life. It must be taken care of. Unhealthy 
persons cannot be Yogis. Mental laziness makes us lose all 
lively interest in the subject, without which there will neither 
be the will nor the energy to practice. Doubts will arise in the 
mind about the truth of the science, however strong one’s 
intellectual conviction may be, until certain peculiar psychic 
experiences come, as hearing, or seeing, at a distance, etc. 

35 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



These glimpses strengthen the mind and make the student 
persevere. Falling away when attained. Some says or weeks 
when you are practising the mind will be calm and easily 
concentrated, and you will find yourself progressing fast. All 
of a sudden the progress will stop one day, and you will find 
yourself, as it were, stranded. Persevere. All progress 
proceeds by rise and fall. 

31. II II 

duhkhadaurmanasyanggamejayatvashvasaprashvaa 

vikshepasahabhuvah 

Grief, mental distress, tremor of the body and 
irregular breathing, accompany non-retention of 
concentration. 

Concentration will bring perfect repose to mind and body 
every time it is practised. When the practice has been 
misdirected, or not enough controlled, these disturbances 
come. Repetition of Om and self- surrender to the Lord will 
strengthen the mind, and bring fresh energy. The nervous 
shakings will come to almost everyone. Do not mind them at 
all, but keep on practising. Practice will cure them, and make 
the seat firm. 

32. II V* II 

tatpratishedhartham ekatattvabhyasah 

To remedy this practice of one subject (should be 
made). 



36 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Making the mind take the form of one object for some time 
will destroy these obstacles. This is general advice. In the 
following aphorisms it will be expanded and particularised. 
As one practice cannot suit everyone, various methods will be 
advanced, and everyone by actual experience will find out 
that which helps him most. 



33. 




:^ u ^iK|fafc|A||U|j 




II \\\\ 



maitreekarunamuditopekshanan 
sukhad uhkhap unyapunyavishayanan 
bhavanatashchittapmsadanam 



Friendship, mercy, gladness, indifference, being 
thought of in regard to subjects, happy, unhappy, 
good and evil respectively, pacify the Chitta. 

We must have these four sorts of ideas. We must have 
friendship for all; we must be merciful towards those that are 
in misery; when people are happy we ought to be happy, and 
to the wicked we must be indifferent. So with all subjects that 
come before us. If the subject is a good one, we shall feel 
friendly towards it; if the subject of thought is one that is 
miserable we must be merciful towards the subject. If it is 
good we must be glad, if it is evil we must be indifferent. 
These attitudes of the mind towards the different subjects that 
come before it will make the mind peaceful. Most of our 
difficulties in our daily lives come from being unable to hold 
our minds in this way. For instance, if a man does evil to us, 



37 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



instantly we want to react evil, and every reaction of evil 
shows that we are not able to hold the Chitta down; it comes 
out in waves towards the object, and we lose our power. Every 
reaction in the form of hatred or evil is so much loss to the 
mind, and every evil thought or deed of hatred, or any thought 
of reaction, if it is controlled, will be laid in our favour. It is 
not that we lose by thus restraining ourselves; we are gaining 
infinitely more than we suspect. Each time we suppress 
hatred, or a feeling of anger, it is so much good energy stored 
up in our favour; that piece of energy will be converting into 
the higher powers. 

34. 3T II XVII 

prachchhardanavidharanabhyan va prannasya 

By throwing out and restraining the Breath. 

The word used in Prana. Prana is not exactly breath. It is the 
name for the energy that is in the universe. Whatever you 
see in the universe, whatever moves or works, or has life, is a 
manifestation of this Prana, the sum-total of the energy 
displayed in the universe is called Prana. This Prana, before 
a cycle begins, remains in an almost motionless state, and 
when the cycle begins this Prana begins to manifest itself. It 
is this Prana that is manifested as motion, as the nervous 
motion in human beings or animals, and the same Prana is 
manifesting as thought, and so on. The whole universe is a 
combination of Prana and Akasa ; so is the human body. Out 
of Akasa you get the different materials that you feel, and 
see, and out of Prana all the various forces. Now this 
throwing out and restraining the Prana is what is called 



38 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Pranayama. Patanjali, the father of the Yoga Philosophy, 
does not give many particular directions about Pranayama, 
but later on other Yogis found out various things about this 
Pranayama, and made of it a great science. With Patanjali ist 
is one of the many ways, but he does not lay much stress on it. 
He means that you simply throw the air out, and draw it in, 
and hold it for some time, that is all, and by that, the mind will 
become a little calmner. But, later on, you will find that out of 
this is evolved a particular science called Pranayama. We 
will hear a little of what thoese later Yogis have to say. Some 
of this I have told you before, but a little repetition will serve 
to fix it in your minds. First, you must remember that this 
Prana is not the breath. But that which causes the motion of 
the breath, that which is the vitality of the breath is the Prana. 
Again, the word Prana is used of all the senses; they are all 
called Prana, the mind is called Prana', and so we see that 
Prana is the name of a certain force. And yet we cannot call 
it force, because force is only the manifestation of it. It is that 
which manifests itself as force and everything else in the way 
of motion. The Chitta, the mind-stuff, is the engine which 
draws in the Prana from the surroundings, and manufactures 
out of this Prana the various vital forces. First of all the 
forces that keep the body in preservation, and lastly thought, 
will, and all other powers. By this process of breathing we can 
control all the various motions in the body, and the various 
nerve currents that are running through the body. First we 
begin to recognise them, and then we slowly get control over 
them. Now these later Yogis consider that there are three main 
currents of this Prana in the human body. One they call Ida , 
another Pingala, and the third SuSumna. Pingala , according 
to them, is on the right side of the spinal column, and the Ida 

39 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



is on the left side, and in the middle of this spinal column is 
the SuSumna, a vacant channel. Ida and Pingala, according 
to them, are the currents working in every man, and through 
these currents, we are performing all the functions of life. 
SuSumna is present in all, as a possibility; but it works only in 
the Yogi. You must remember that the Yogi changes his body; 
as you go on practising your body changes; it is not the same 
body that you had before the practice. That is very rational, 
and can be explained, because every new thought that we 
have must make, as it were, a new channel through the brain, 
and that explains the tremendous conservatism of human 
nature. Human nature likes to run through the ruts that are 
already there, because it is easy. If we think, just for 
example’s sake, that the mind is like a needle, and the brain 
substance a soft lump before it, then each thought that we 
have makes a street, as it were, in the brain, and this street 
would close up, but that the grey matter comes and makes a 
lining to keep it separate. If there were no grey matter there 
would be no memory, because memory means going over 
these old streets, retracing a thought as it were. Now perhaps 
you have remarked that when I talk on subjects that in which I 
take a few ideas that are familiar to everyone, and combine, 
and recombine them, it is easy to follow, because these 
channels are present in everyone’s brain, and it is only 
necessary to recur to them. But whenever a new subject 
comes new channels have to be made, so it is not understood 
so readily. And that is why the brain (it is the brain, and not 
the people themselves) refuses unconsciously to be acted 
upon by new ideas. It resists. The Prana is trying to make 
new channels, and the brain will not allow it. This is the secret 
of conservatism. The less channels there have been in the 

40 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



brain, and the less the needle of the Prana has made these 
passages, the more conservative will be the brain, the more it 
will struggle against new thoughts. The more thoughtful the 
mane, the more complicated will be the streets in his brain, 
and the more easily he will take to new ideas, and understand 
them. So with every fresh idea; we make a new impression in 
the brain, cut new channels though the brain- stuff, and that is 
why we find that in the practice of Yoga (it being an entirely 
new set of thoughts and motives) there is so much physical 
resistance at first. That is why we find that the part of 
religion which deals with the world side of nature can be so 
widely accpeted, while the other part, the Philosophy, or the 
Psychology, which deals with the inner nature of man, is so 
frequently neglected. We must remember the definition of 
this world of ours; it is only the Infinite Existence projected 
into the plane of consciousness. A little of the Infinite is 
projected into consciousness, and that we call our world. So 
there is an Infinite beyond, and religion has to deal with both, 
with th elittle lump we call our world, and with the Infinite 
beyond. Any religion which deals alone with either one of 
these two will be defective. It must deal with both. That part 
of religion which deals with this part of the Infinite which has 
come into this plane of consciousness, got itself caught, as it 
were, in the plane of consciousness, in the case of time, space, 
and causation, is quite familiar to us, because we are in that 
already, and ideas about this world have been with us almost 
from time immemorial. The part of religion which deals with 
the Infinite beyond comes entirely new to us, and getting 
ideas about it produces new channels in the brain, disturbing 
the whole system, and that is why you find in the practice of 
Yoga ordinary people are at first turned out of their groove. In 

41 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



order to lesson these disturbances as much as possible all 
these methods are devised by Patanjali , that we may practice 
any one of them best suited to us. 

35. RWR % cfT M<iRl«KM*ll II ^ II 

vishayavati va pravrittirutpanna manasah 
sthitinibandhini 

Those forms of concentration that bring extraordinary 
sense perceptions cause perseverance of the mind. 

This naturally comes with Dharana, concentration; the Yogis 
say, if the mind becomes concentrated on the tip of the nose 
one begins to smell, after a few days, wonderful perfumes. If 
it becomes concentrated at the root of the tongue one begins to 
here sounds; if on the tip of the tongue one begins to taste 
wonderful flavours; if on the middle of the tongue, one feels 
as if he were coming in contact with something. If one 
concentrates his mind on the palate he begins to see peculiar 
things. If a man whose mind is disturbed wants to take up 
some of these practices of Yoga, yet doubts the truth of them, 
he will have his doubts set at rest, when, after a little practice, 
these things come to him, and he will persevere. 

36. R5T1TT ^ ^llld^Hdl II ^ II 

vishoka va jyotishmati 

Or (by the meditation on) the Effulgent One which is 
beyond all sorrow. 



This is another sort of concentration. Think of the lotus of the 

42 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



heart, with petals downwards, and ruunning through it the 
SuCumna; take in the breath, and while throwing the breat out 
imagine that the lotus is turned with the petals upwards, and 
inside that lotus is an effulgent light. Meditate on that. 

37. ^HTWi ^ II II 

vitamgavishciyan va chittam 

Or (by meditation on) the heart that has given up all 
attachment to sense objects. 

Take some holy person, some great person whom you revere, 
some saint whom you know to be perfectly non-attached, and 
think of his heart. That heart has become non-attached, and 
meditate on that heart; it will calm the mind. If you cannot do 
that, there is the next way. 

38. ^UH^IHI^HH 3T II \c II 

svapnanidmjnanalambanan va 

Or by meditating on the knowledge that comes in 
sleep. 

Sometimes a man dreams that he has seen angels coming to 
him and talking to him, that he is in an ecstatic condition, that 
he has heard music floating through the air. He is in a 
blissful condition in that dream, and when he awakes it makes 
a deep impression on him. Think of that dream as real, and 
meditate upon it. If you cannot do that, meditate on any holy 
thing that pleases you. 



43 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



39. II V\\\ 

yathabhimatadhyanad va 

Or by meditation on anything that appeals to one as 
good. 

This does not mean any wicked subject, but anything good 
that you like, any place that you like best, any scenery that 
you like best, any idea that you like best, anything that will 
concentrate the mind. 

40. 9W5 c|^kl<: II *°ll 

paramanu paramamahattvantosya vashikarcih 
The Yogi's mind thus meditating, becomes 
un-obstructed from the atomic to the Infinite. 

The mind, by this practice, easily contemplates the most 
minute thing, as well as the biggest thing. Thus the mind 
waves become fainter. 

dc^d^sHdlWNIrb II V? II 

ksheennavritterabhijatasyev 

manergrahitrigrahannagrahyeshu 

tatsthatadangjanatasamapattih 

The Yogi whose Vrttis have thus become powerless 

(controlled) obtains in the receiver, receiving, and 



44 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



received (the self, the mind and external objects), 
concentratedness and sameness, like the crystal 
(before different coloured objects.) 

What results from this constant meditation? We must 
remember how in a previous aphorism Patanjali went into the 
various states of meditation, and how the first will be the 
gross, and the second the fine objects, and from them the 
advance is to still finer objects of meditation, and how, in all 
these meditations, which are only of the first degree, not very 
high ones, we get as a result that we can meditate as easily on 
the fine as on the grosser objects. Here the Yogi sees the three 
things, the receiver, the received, and the receiving, 
corresponding to the Soul, the object, and the mind. There are 
three objects of meditation given us. Firs the gross things, as 
bodies, or material objects, second fine things, as the mind, 
the Chitta , and third the PuraSa qualified, not the PuraSa 
itself, but the egoism. By practice, the Yogi gets established in 
all these meditations. Whenever he meditates he can keep out 
all other thought; he becomes identified with that on which he 
mediates; when he meditates he is like a piece of crystal; 
before flowers the crystal becomes almost identified with 
flowers. If the flower is red, the crystal looks red, or if the 
flower is blue, the crystal looks blue. 

42. cf=T H4T4T HMckhl H-HNIrl: II VR II 

tatra shabdarthajnanavikalpaih sankeerna savitarka 
samapattih 

Sound, meaning, and resulting knowledge, being 
mixed up, is (called Samadhi) with reasoning. 



45 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Sound here means vibration; meaning, the nerve currents 
which conduct it; and knowledge, reaction. All the various 
meditations we have had so far, Patanjali calls Savitarka 
(meditations with reasoning). Later on he will give us higher 
and higher Dhyanas. In these that are called “with reasoning,” 
we keep the duality of subject and object, which results from 
the mixture of word, meaning, and knowledge. There is first 
the external vibration, the word; this, carried inward by the 
sense currents, is the meaning. After that there comes a 
reactionary wave in the Chitta, which is knowledge, but the 
mixture of these three makeup what we call knowledge. In all 
the meditations up to this we get this mixture as object of 
meditation. The next Sam ad hi is higher. 



43. 




HMcHI II VXII 



smritiporishuddhau 

svaroopashoonyeva rthamatrani rbhasa nirvita rka 



The Samadhi called without reasoning (conies) when 
the memory is purified, or devoid of qualities, 
expressing only the meaning (of the meditated 
object). 

It is by practice of meditation of these three that we come to 
the state where these three do not mix. We can get rid of them. 
We will first try to understand what these three are. Here is 
the Chitta ; you will always remember the simile of the lake, 
the mind- stuff, and the vibration, the word, the sound, like a 
pulsation coming over it. You have that calm lake in you, and 
I pronounce a word, “cow.” As soon as it enters through 

46 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



your ears there is a wave produced in your China along with 
it. So that wave represents the idea of the cow, the form or the 
meaning as we call it. That apparent cow that you know is 
really that wave in the mind-stuff, and that comes as a 
reaction to the internal and external sound-vibrations, and 
with the sound, the wave dies away; that wave can never exist 
without a word. You may ask how it is when we only think of 
the cow, and do not hear a sound. You make that sound 
yourself. You are saying “cow” faintly in your mind, and 
with that comes a wave. There cannot be any wave without 
this impulse of sound, and when it is not from outside it is 
from inside, and when the sound dies, the wave dies. What 
remains? The result of the reaction, and that is knowledge. 
These three are so closely combined in our mind that we 
cannot separate them. When the sound comes, the senses 
vibrate, and the wave rises in reaction; they follow so closely 
upon one another that there is no discerning one from the 
other; when this meditation has been practiced for a long time, 
memory, the receptacle of all impressions, becomes purified, 
and wwe are able clearly to distinguish them from one 
another. This is called “ Nirvitarka ,” concentration without 
reasoning. 

44. <7^1 -hRnRI HT%RT ^ «4K^MIdl II VV II 

etayaiva savichara nirvicharci cha sookshmavishaya 
vyakhyata 

By this process (the concentrations) with 
discrim-ination and without discrimination, whose 
objects are finer, are (also) explained. 



47 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



A process similar to the preceding is applied again, only, the 
objects to be taken up in the former meditations are gross; in 
this they are fine. 

45. II II 

sookshmavishayatvan chciling gapary avasanam 

The finer objects end with the Pradhana. 

The gross objects are only the elements, and everything 
manufactured out of them. The fine objects begin with the 
Tanmatras or fine particles. The organs, the mind 1 , egoism, 
the mind-stuff (the cause of all manifestion) the equilibrium 
state of Satt\>a, Rajas and Tamas materials — called Pradhana 
(chief), Prakrti (nature), or Avyakta (unmanifest), are all 
included within the category of fine objects. The PuruSa (the 
Soul) alone is excepted from this definition. 

46. cTT T4 T(4fTl: TFTTN: II II 

ta eva sabijah samadhih 

These concentrations are with seed. 

These do not destroy the seeds of past actions, thus cannot 
give liberation, but what they bring to the Yogi is stated in the 
following aphorisms. 

47. HN-dK^IK^SUUrHM^IK- II V^ll 

nirvichamvaisharadye adhyatmaprasadah 



The mind, or common sensory, the aggregate of all senses 

48 ^ 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



The concentration “without reasoning” being 
purified, the Chitta becomes firmly fixed. 

48. WT H Veil 

rtanbhara tatr prajna 

The knowledge in that is called “filled with Truth.” 

The next aphorism will explain this. 

49. Fiwfalct II II 

shrutanumanaprajnabhyam anyavishayaa 
vishesharthatvat 

The knowledge that is gained from testimony and 
inference is about common objects. That from the 
Samadhi just mentioned is of a much higher order, 
being able to penetrate where inference and 
testimony cannot go. 

The idea is that we have to get our knowledge of ordinary 
objects by direct perception, and by inference therefrom, and 
from testimony of people who are competent. By “people 
who are competent,” the Yogis always mean the Rishis, or the 
Seers of the thoughts recorded in the Scriptures — the Vedas. 
According to them, the only proof of the Scriptures is that 
they were the testimony of competent persons, yet they say 
the Scriptures cannot take us to realisation. We can read all 
the Vedas, and yet will not realise anything, but when we 
practise their teachings, then we attain to that state which 
realises what the Scriptures say, which penetrates where 

49 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



reason cannot go, and where the testimony of others cannot 
avail. This is what is meant by this aphorism, that realisation 
is real religion, and all the rest is only preparation — hearing 
lectures, or reading books, or reasoning, is merely preparing 
the ground; it is not religion. Intellectual assent, and 
intellectual dissent are not religion. The central idea of the 
Yogis is that just as we come in direct contact with the objects 
of the senses, so religion can be directly perceived in a far 
more intense sense. The truths of religion, as God and Soul, 
cannot be perceived by the external senses. I cannot see God 
with my eyes, nor can I touch Him with my hands, and we 
also know that neither can we reason beyond the senses. 
Reason leaves us at a point quite indecisive; we may reason 
all our lives, as the world has been doing for thousands of 
years, and the result is that we find we are incompetent to 
prove or disprove the facts of religion. What we perceive 
directly we take as the basis, and upon that basis we reason. 
So it is obvious that reasoning has to run within these bounds 
of perception. It can never go beyond: the whole scope of 
realisation, therefore, is beyond sense perception. The Yogis 
say that man can go beyond his direct sense perception, and 
beyond his reason also. Man has in him the faculty, the 
power, of transcending his intellect even, and that power is in 
every being, every creature. By the practice of Yoga that 
power is aroused, and then man transcends the ordinary limits 
of reason, and directly perceives things which are beyond all 
reason. 



50 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



50. cT^T: 4w>l<) KM Id ^l4t II || 

tajjah sanskaro nyasanskarcipratibandhi 

The resulting impression from this Samadhi obstructs 
all other impressions. 

We have seen in the foregoing aphorism that the only way of 
attaining to that super-consciousness is by concentration, and 
we have also seen that what hinder the mind from 
concentration are the past Samskaras, impressions. All of you 
have observed that when you are trying to concentrate your 
mind, your thoughts wander. When you are trying to think of 
God, that is the very time which all these Samskaras take to 
appear. At other times they are not so active, but when you 
want them not to be they are sure to be there, trying their best 
to crowd inside your mind. Why should that be so? Why 
should they be much more potent at the time of 
concentration? It is because you are repressing them and they 
react with all their force. At other times they do not react. 
How countless these old past impressions must be, all lodge 
somewhere in the Chitta, ready, waiting like tigers to jump 
up. These have to be suppressed that the one idea which we 
like may arise, to the exclusion of the others. Instead, they are 
all struggling to come up at the same time. These are the 
various powers of the Samskaras in hindering concentration 
of the mind, so this Samadhi which has just been given is the 
best to be practised, on account of its power of suppressing 
the Samskaras. The Samskara which will be raised by this 
sort of concentration will be so powerful that it will hinder the 
action of the others, and hold them in check. 



51 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



51. cTFITFf HTN ^RTN: II H? II 

tasyapi nirodhe sarvanirodhannirbijah samadhih 
By the restraint of even this (impression, which 
obstructs all other impressions), all being restrained, 
comes the “seedless” Samadhi. 

You remember that our goal is to perceive the Soul iself. We 
cannot perceive the Soul because it has got mingled up with 
nature, with the mind, with the body. The most ignorant man 
thinks his body is the Soul. The more learned man thinks his 
mind is the Soul, but both of these are mistaken. What makes 
the Soul get mingled up with all this, these different waves in 
the Chitta rise and cover the Soul, and we only are a little 
reflection of the Soul through these waves, so, if the wave be 
one of anger, we see the Soul as angry: “I am angry,” we say. 
If the wave is a wave of love we see ourselves reflected in that 
wave, and say we are loving. If that wave is one of weakness, 
and the Soul is reflected in it, we think we are weak. These 
various ideas come from these impressions, these Samskaras 
covering the Soul. The real nature of the Soul is not perceived 
until all the waves have subsided; so, first, Patanjali teaches 
us the meaning of these waves; secondly, the best way to 
repress them; and thirdly, how to make one wave so strong as 
to suppress all other waves, fire eating fire as it were. When 
only one remains, it will be easy to suppress that also, and 
when that is gone, this Samadhi of concentration is called 
seedless; it leaves nothing, and the Soul is manifested just as 
It is, in Its own glory. Then alone we know that the Soul is not 
a compound, It is the only eternal simple in the universe, and, 



52 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



as such, It cannot be born, It cannot die, It is immortal, 
indestructible, the Ever-living Essence of intelligence. 



53 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



CHAPTER II - SADHANA PADA 

CONCENTRATION - ITS PRACTICE 

II H 



1. J^i|N>|: II ? II 

tapahsvadhyayeshvampranidhanani kriyayogcih 

Mortification, study, and surrendering fruits of work 
to God are called Kriya Yoga. 

Those Sam ad his with which we ended our last chapter are 
very difficult to attain; so we must take them up slowly. The 
first step, the preliminary step, is called Kriya Yoga. Literally 
this means work, working towards Yoga. The organs are the 
horses, the mind is the reins, the intellect is the charioteer, the 
soul is the rider, and this body is the chariot. The master of the 
household, the King, the Self of man, is sitting in this chariot. 
If the horses are very strong, and do not obey the reins, if the 
charioteer, the intellect, does not know how to control the 
horses, then this chariot will come to grief. But if the organs, 
the horses, are well controlled, and if the reins, the mind, are 
well held in the hands of the charioteer, the intellect, the 
chariot, reaches the goal. What is meant, therefore, by 
mortification? Holding the reins firmly while guiding this 
body and mind: not letting the body do anything it likes, but 
keeping them both in proper control. Study. What is meant by 
study in this case? Not study of novels, or fiction, or story 
books, but study of those books which teach the liberation of 
the soul. Then again this study does not mean controversial 

54 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



studies at all. The Yogi is supposed to have finished his period 
of controversy. He has had enough of all that, and has become 
satisfied. He only studies to intensify his convictions. Vada 
and Siddhanta. These are the two sorts of Scriptural 
knowledge, Vada (the argumentative) and Siddhanta (the 
decisive). When a man is entirely ignorant he takes up the first 
part of this, the argumentative fighting, and reasoning, pro 
and con.-, and when he has finished that he takes up the 
Siddhanta , the decisive, arriving at a conclusion. Simply 
arriving at this conclusion will not do. It must be intensified. 
Books are infinite in number, and time is short; thereofre this 
is the secret of knowledge, to take that which is essential. 
Take that out, and then try to live up to it. There is an old 
simile in India that if you place a cup of milk before a Raja 
Hamsa (swan) with plenty of water in it, he will take all the 
milk and leave the water. In that way we should take what is 
of value in knowledge, and leave the dross. All these 
intellectual gymnastics are necessary at first. We must not go 
blindly into anything. The Yogi has passed the argumentative 
stage, and has come to a conclusion, which is like the rocks, 
immovable. The only thing he now seeks to do is to intensify 
that conclusion. Do not argue, he say; if one forces 
arguments upon you, be silent. Do not answer any argument, 
but go away free, because arguments only disturb the mind. 
The only thing is to train the intellect, so what is the use of 
disturbing it any more. The intellect is but a weak 
instrument, and can give only knowledge limited by the 
senses; the Yogi wants to go beyond the senses; therefore the 
intellect is of no use to him. He is certain of this, and therefore 
is silent, and does not argue. Every argument throws his mind 
out of balance, creates a disturbance in the China, and this 

55 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



disturbance is a drawback. These argumentations and 
searchings of the reason are only on the way. There are much 
higher things behind them. The whole of life is not for 
schoolboy fights and debating societies. By “surrendering 
the fruits of work to God” is to take to ourselves neither credit 
nor blame, but to give both up to the Lord, and be at peace. 



2. II R II 

samadhibhavanarthah kleshatanookaranarthashch 

(They are for) the practice of Samadhi and 
minimising the pain-bearing obstructions. 

Most of us make our minds like spoiled children, allowing 
them to do whatever they want. Therefore it is necessary that 
there should be constant practice of the previous 
mortifications, in order to gain control of the mind, and bring 
it into subjection. The obstructions to Yoga arise from lack of 
this control, and cause us pain. They can only be removed by 
denything the mind, and holding it in check, through these 
various means. 



3. 



r\ r\ fN *\ 




: 13TT: II XII 



avidyasmitaragadveshabhiniveshah kleshaah 



The pain-bearing obstructions are - ignorance, 
egoism, attachment, aversion, and clinging to life. 

These are the five pains, the fivefold tie that binds us down. 
Of course ignorance is the mother of all the rest. She is the 



56 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



only cause of all our misery. What else can make us 
miserable? The nature of the Soul is eternal bliss. What can 
make it sorrowful except ignorance, hallucination, delusion; 
all this pain of the soul is simply delusion. 

4. M^Hd^Nh^^KKI u IIH II V II 

avidya kshetram uttareshan 
prasuptatanuvichchhinnodaranam 

Ignorance is the productive field of all them that 
follow, whether they are dormant, attenuated, 
overpowered, or expanded. 

Impressions are the cause of these, and these impressions 
exist in different degrees. There are the dormant. You often 
hear the expression “innocent as a baby,” yet in the baby may 
be the state of a demon or of a god which will come out by and 
by. In the Yogi these impressions, the Samskaras left by past 
actions, are attenuated; that is, in a very fine state, and he can 
control them, and not allow them to become manifest. 
Overpowered means that sometimes one set of impressions is 
held down for a while by those that are stronger, but they will 
come out when that repressing cause is removed. The last 
state is the expanded, when the Samskaras, having helpful 
surroundings, have attained to great activity, either as good or 
evil. 



5. IcHfM I icRN'dT II Ml 

anityashuchiduhkhanatmasu 

nityashuchisukhatmakhyatiravidya 

57 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Ignorance is taking that which is non-eternal, impure, 
painful, and non-Self, for the eternal, pure, happy, 
Atman (Self). 

All these various sorts of impression have one source: 
ignorance. We have first to learn what ignorance is. All of us 
think that “I am the body,” and not the Self, the pure, the 
effulgent, the ever blissful, and that is ignorance. We think of 
man, and see man as body. This is the great delusion. 

6. ^^MAlTldK^IrHddllfHdl II $ II 

drigdarshanashaktyorekatmatevasmita 

Egoism is the identification of the seer with the 
instrument of seeing. 

The seer is really the Self, the pure one, the ever holy, the 
infinite, the immortal. That is the Self of man. And what are 
the instruments? The Chitta, or mind-stuff, the Buddhi, 
determinative faculty, the Manas, or mind, and the Indriyani, 
or sense organs. These are the instruments for him to see the 
external world, and the identification of the Self with the 
instruments is what is called the ignorance of egoism. We say 
“I am the mind, I am thought; I am angry, or I am happy.” 
How can we be angry, and how can we hate? We should 
identify ourselves with the Self; that cannot change. If it is 
unchangeable, how can it be one moment happy, and one 
moment unhappy? It is formless, infinite, omnipresent. What 
can change it? Beyond all law. What can affect it? Nothing in 
the universe can produce an effect on it, yet, through 
ignorance, we identify ourselves with the mind-stuff, and 



58 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



think we feel pleasure or pain. 

7. TFT: || vs || 

sukhanushayi mag ah 

Attachment is that which dwells on pleasure. 

We find pleasure in certain things, and the mind, like a 
current, flows towards them, and that, following the pleasure 
centre, as it were, is attachment. We are never attached to 
anyone in whom we do not find pleasure. We find pleasure in 
very queer things sometimes, but the definition is just the 
same; wherever we find pleasure, there we are attached. 

8 . 5 ^: 11^11 

duhkhanushayi dveshah 

Aversion is that which dwells on pain. 

That, which gives us pain we immediately seek to get away 
from. 

9. <W*H=llfi FT^TSN F^T^STFR^l: II <UI 

svarasavahi vidushopi tadmroodho bhiniveshah 

Flowing through its own nature, and established even 
in the learned, is the clinging to life. 

This clinging to life you see manifested in every animal, and 
upon it many attempts have been made to build the theory of a 
future life, because men like their lives so much that they 
desire a future life also. Of course it goes without saying that 



59 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



this argument is without much value, but the most curious part 
of it is that, in Western Countries, the idea that this clinging to 
life indicates a possibility of a future life applies only to men, 
but does not include animals. In India this clinging to life has 
been one of the arguments to prove past experience and 
existence. For instance, if it be true that all our knowledge has 
come from experience, then it is sure that that which we never 
experienced we cannot imagine, or understand. As soon as 
chickens are hatched they begin to pick up food. Many times 
it has been seen where ducks have been hatched by hens, that, 
as soon as they come out of the eggs, they flew to water, and 
the mother thought they would be drowned. If experience be 
the only source of knowledge, where did these chickens learn 
to pick up food, or the ducklings that the water was their 
natural element? If you say it is instinct, it means nothing — it 
is simply giving it a word, but is no explanation. What is this 
instinct? We have many instincts in ourselves. For instance, 
most of you ladies play the piano, and remember, when you 
first learned, how carefully you had to put your fingers on the 
black and the white keys, one after the other, but now, after 
long years of practice, you can talk with your friends, and 
your hand goes on just the same. It has become instinct, it 
becomes automatic, but so far as we know, all the cases which 
we now regard as automatic are degenerated reason. In the 
language of the Yogi , instinct is involved reason. 
Discrimination becomes involved, and gets to be automatic 
Samskaras. Therefore it is perfectly logical to think that all 
we call instinct in this world is simply involved reason. As 
reason cannot come without experience, all instinct is, 
therefore, the result of past experience. Chickens fear the 
hawk, and ducklings love the water, and these are both the 

60 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



result of past experience, and these are both the result of past 
experience. Then the question is whether that experience 
belongs to a particular soul, or to the body simply, whether 
this experience which comes to the duck is the duck’s 
forefather’s experience, or the duck’s own experience. 
Modern scientific menhold that it belongs to the body, but the 
Yogis hold that it is the experience of the soul, transmitted 
through the body. This is called the theory of reincarnation. 
We have seen that all of our knowledge, whether we call it 
perception or reason, or instinct, must come through that one 
channel called experience, and all that we know call instinct is 
the result of past experience, degenerated into instinct, and 
that instinct regenerates into reason again. So on throughout 
the universe, and upon this has been built one of the chief 
arguments for reincarnation, in India. The recurring 
experiences of various fears, in course of time, produce this 
clinging to life. That is why the child is instinctively afraid, 
because the past experience of pain is there. Even in the most 
learned men, who know that this body will go, and who say 
“never mind: we have hundreds of bodies; the soul cannot 
die” — even in them, with all their intellectual conviction, we 
still find this clinging to life. What is this clinging to life? We 
have seen that it has become instinctive. In the psychological 
language of Yoga if has become Samskaras. The Samskaras, 
fine and hidden, are sleeping in the China. All these past 
experiences of death, all that which we call instinct, is 
experience become sub-conscious. It lives in the China, and 
is not inactive, but is working underneath. These China Vrttis, 
these mind-waves, which are gross, we can appreciate and 
feel; they can be more easily controlled, but what about these 
finer instincts? How can they be controlled? When I am angry 

61 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



my whole mind has become a huge wave of anger, feel it, see 
it, handle it, can easily manipulate it, can fight with it, but I 
shall not succeed perfectly in the fight until I can get down 
below. A man says something very harsh to me, and I begin to 
feel that I am getting heated, and he goes on until I am 
perfectly angry, and forget myself, identify myself with 
anger. When he first began to abuse me I still thought “I am 
going to be angry.” Anger was one thing and I was another, 
but when I became angry, I was anger. These feelings have to 
be controlled in the germ, the root, in their fine forms, before 
even we have become conscious that they are acting on us. 
With the vast majority of mankind the fine states of these 
passions are not even known, the state when they are slowly 
coming from beneath consciousness. When a bubble is rising 
from the bottom of the lake we do not see it, or even when it is 
nearly come to the surface; it is only when it bursts and makes 
a ripple that we know it is there. We shall only be successful 
in grappling with the waves when we can get hold of them in 
their fine casues, and until you can get hold of them, and 
subdue them before any become gross, there is no hope of 
conquering any passion perfectly. To control our passions we 
have to control them at their very roots; then alone shall we be 
able to burn out their very seed. As fried seeds thrown into the 
ground will never come up, so these passions will never arise. 

10. 3 II Ml 

te pratiprasavaheyah sookshmah 

They, to-be-rejected-by-opposite-modifications, are 
fine. 



62 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



How are these fine Samskaras to be controlled? We have to 
begin with the big waves, and come down and down. For 
instance, when a big wave of anger has come into the mind, 
how are we to control that? Just by raising a big opposing 
wave. Think of love. Sometimes a mother is very angry with 
her husband, and while in that state the baby comes in, and 
she kisses the baby; the old wave dies out, and a new wave 
arises, love for the child. That suppresses the other one. Love 
is opposite to anger. So we find that by raising the opposite 
waves we can conquer those which we want to reject. Then, if 
we can raise in our fine nature those fine opposing waves, 
they will check the fine workings of anger beneath the 
conscious surface. We have seen now that all these instinctive 
actions first began as conscious actions, and became finer and 
finer. So, if good waves in the conscious Chitta be constantly 
raised, they will go down, become subtle, and oppose the 
Samskara forms of evil thoughts. 

11. II ??ll 

dhyanaheyastadvrittayah 

By meditation, their modifications are to be rejected. 

Meditation is one of the great means of controlling the rising 
of these big waves. By meditation you can make the mind 
subdue these waves, and, if you go on practising meditation 
for days, and months, and years, until it has become a habit, 
until it will come in spite of yourself, anger and hatred will be 
controlled and checked. 



63 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



12. 5: Wkl4l II ?RII 

kleshamoolah karmashayo 
drishtadrishtajanmavedaniyah 

The receptacle of works has its root in these 
pain-bearing obstructions, and their experience in this 
visible life, or in the unseen life. 

By the receptacle of works is meant the sum-total of these 
Samskaras. Whatever work we do, the mind is thrown into a 
wave, and, after the work is finished, we think the wave is 
gone. No. It has only become fine, but it is still there. When 
we try to remember the thing, it comes up again and becomes 
a wave. So it was there; if it had not been there, there would 
not have been memory. So, every action, every thought, good 
or bad, just goes down and becomes fine, and is there stored 
up. They are called pain-bearing obstructions, both happy and 
unhappy thoughts, because according to the Yogis , both, in the 
long run, bring pain. All happiness which comes from the 
senses will, eventually, bring pain. All enjoyment will make 
us thirst for more, and that brings pain as its result. There is no 
limit to man’s desires; he goes on desring, and when he comes 
to a point where desire cannot be fulfilled, the result is pain. 
Therefore the Yogis regard the sum-total of the impressions, 
good or evil, as pain-bearing obstructions; they obstruct the 
way to freedom of the Soul. It is the same with the Samskaras, 
the fine roots of all our works: they are the causes which will 
again bring effects, either in this life, or in the lives to come. 
In exceptional cases, when these Samskaras are very strong, 
they bear fruit quickly; exceptional acts of wickedness, or of 



64 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



goodness, bring their fruits in this life. The Yogis even hold 
that men who are able to acquire a tremendous power of good 
Samskaras do not have to die, but, even in this life, can 
change their bodies into god-bodies. There are several cases 
mentioned by the Yogis in their books. These men change the 
very material of their bodies; they re-arrange the molecules in 
such fashion that they have no more sickness, and what we 
call death does not come to them. Why should not this be? 
The physiological meaning of foot is assimilation of energy 
from the sun. This energy has reached the plant, the plant is 
eaten by an animal, and the animal by us. The science of it is 
that we take so much energy from the sun, and make it part of 
ourselves. That being the case, why should there be only one 
way of assimilating energy? The plant’s way is not the same 
as ours; the earth’s process of assimilating energy differs from 
our own. But all assimilate energy in some form or other. The 
Yogis say that they are able to assimilate energy by the power 
of the mind alone, that they can draw in as much as they desire 
without recourse to the orindary methods. As a spider makes 
his net out of his own substance, and becomes bound in his 
net, and cannot go anywhere except along the lines of that net, 
so we have projected out of our own substance this net-work 
called the nerves, and we cannot work except through the 
channels of those nerves. The Yogi says we need not be bound 
by that. Similary, we can send electricity to any part of the 
world, but we have to send it by means of wires. Nature can 
send a vast mass of electricity without any wires at all. Why 
cannot we do the same? We can send mental electricity. What 
we call mind is very much the same as electricity. It is clear 
that this nerve fluid has some amount of electricity, because it 
is polarised, and it answers all electrical directions. We can 

65 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



only send our electricity through these nerve channels. Why 
not send the mental electricity without this aid? The Yogi 
says it is perfectly possible and practicable, and that when you 
can do that you will work all over the universe. You will be 
able to work with anybody anywhere, without the help of any 
nervous system. When the soul is acting through these 
channels we say a man is living and when those channels die 
the man is said to be said. But when a man is able to act either 
with or without these channels, birth and death will have no 
meaning for him. All the bodies in the universe are made up 
of Tanmatras, and it is only in the arrangement of them that 
there comes a difference. If you are the arranger you can 
arrange that body in one way or another. Who makes up this 
body but you? Who eats the food? If another ate the food for 
you, you would not live long. Who makes the blood out of 
it? You, certainly. Who assimilates the blood, and sends it 
through the veins? You. Who creates the nerves, and makes 
all the muscles? You are the manufacturer, out of your own 
substance. You are the manufacturer of the body, and you live 
in it. Only we have lost the knowledge of how to make it. We 
have become automatic, degenerate. We have forgotten the 
process of manufacture. So, what we do automatically has 
again to be regulated. We are the creators and we have to 
regulate that creation, and as soon as we can do that we shall 
be able to manufacture just as we like, and then we shall have 
neither birth nor death, disease, or anything. 

13. ^ msm ^n^FiT: ii n\\ 

sati moole tadvipako jatyayurbhogah 

The root being there, the fruition comes (in the form 



66 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



of) species, life, and expression of pleasure and pain. 

The roots, the causes, the Samskaras being there, they again 
manifest, and form the effects. The cause dying down 
becomes the effect, and the effect becomes more subtle, and 
becomes the cause of the next effect. The tree bears a seed, 
and becomes the cause of the next tree, and so on. All our 
works now, are the effects of past Samskaras. Again, these 
Samskaras become the cause of future actions, and thus we go 
on. So this aphorism says that the cause being there, the fruit 
must come, in the form of species; one will be a man, another 
an angel, another an animal, another a demon. Then there are 
different effects in life; one man lives fifty years, another a 
hundred, and another dies in two years, and never attains 
maturity; all these differences in life are regulated by these 
past actions. One man is born, as it were, for pleasure; if he 
buries himself in a forest pleasure will follow him there. 
Another man, wherever he goes, pain follows him, everything 
becomes painful. It is all the result of their own past. 
According to the philosophy of the Yogis all virtuous actions 
bring pleasure, and all vicious actions bring pain. Any man 
who does wicked deeds is sure to reap the fruit of them in the 
form of pain. 

14. ^ II ?*ll 

te hladaparitapafalah punyapunyahetutvat 

They bear fruit as pleasure or pain, caused by virtue 

or vice. 



67 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



15. qRu I FT d IM'H’Wj' R g: bcf 

R%%5: II ?MI 

parinamatapasanskaraduhkhairgunnavritti - 
virodhaccha duhkham eva sarvan vivekinah 
To the discriminating, all is, as it were, painful on 
account of everything bringing pain, either in the 
consequences, or in apprehension, or in attitude 
caused by impressions, also on account of the counter 
action of qualities. 

The Yogis say that the man who has discriminating powers, 
the man of good sense, sees through all these various things, 
which are called pleasure and pain, and knows that they are 
always equally distributed, and that one follows the other, and 
melts into the other; he sees that men are following an ignis 
fatuus all their lives, and never succeed in fulfilling their 
desires. There was never a love in this world which did not 
know decay. The great king YudiSthira once said that the 
most wonderful thing in life is that every moment we see 
people dying around us, and yet we think we shall never die. 
Surrounded by fools on every side, we think we are the only 
exceptions, the only learned men. Surrounded by all sorts of 
experiences of fickleness, we think our love is the only lasting 
love. How can that be? Even love is selfish, and the Yogi says 
that, in the end, we shall find that even the love of husbands 
and wives, and children and friends, slowly decays. 
Decadence seizes everything in this life. It is only when 
everything, even love, fails, that, with a flash, man finds out 

68 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



how vain, how dream-like is this world. Then he catches a 
glimpse of Vairagyam (renunciation), catches a glimpse of 
the beyond. It is only by giving up this world that the other 
comes; never through building on to this one. Never yet was 
there a great soul who had not to reject sense pleasures and 
enjoyments to become such. The cause of misery is the clash 
between difference forces of nature, one dragging one way, 
and another dragging another, rendering permanent happiness 
impossible. 

16. ?$|| 

heyan duhkham anagatam 

The misery which is not yet come is to be avoided. 

Some Karma we have worked out already, some we are 
working out now in the present, and some is waiting to bear 
fruit in the future. That which we have worked out already is 
past and gone. 

That which we are experiencing now we will have to work 
out, and it is only that which is waiting to bear fruit in the 
future that we can conquer and control, so all our forces 
should be directed towards the control of that Karma which 
has not yet borne fruit. That is meant in the previous 
aphorism, when Patanjali says that these various Samskaras 
are to be controlled by counteracting waves. 

17. TPTFTT II ?vs|| 

drashtridrishyayoh sanyogo heyahetuh 

The cause of that which is to be avoided is the 

69 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



junction of the seer and the seen. 

Who is the seer? The Self of Man, the PuruSa. What is the 
seen? The whole of nature, beginning with the mind, down to 
gross matter. All this pleasure and pain arises from the 
junction between this PuruSa and the mind. The PuruSa , you 
must remember, according to this philosophy, is pure; it is 
when it is joined to nature, and by reflection, that it appears to 
feel either pleasure or pain. 

18 . SWf II II 

prakashakriyasthitishilan bhootendriyatmakan 
bhogapavargarthan drishyam 

The experienced is composed of elements and organs, 
is of the nature of illumination, action and intertia, 
and is for the purpose of experience and release (of 
the experiencer). 

The experienced, that is nature, is composed of elements and 
organs — the elements gross and fine which compose the 
whole of nature, and the organs of the senses, mind, etc., and 
is of the nature of illumination, action, and intertia. These are 
what in Sanskrit are called Sattva (illumination), Rajas 
(action), and Tamas (darkness); each is for the purpose of 
experience and relase. What is the purpose of the whole of 
nature? That the PuruSa may gain experience. The PuruSa 
has, as it were, forgotten its mighty, godly, nature. There is a 
story that the king of the gods, Indra, once became a pig, 
wallowing in mire; he had a she pig, and a lot of baby pigs, 
and was very happy. Then some other angels saw his plight, 



70 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



and came to him, and told him, “You are the king of the gods, 
you have all the gods command. Why are you here?” But 
Indra said, “Let me be; I am all right here; I do not care for the 
heavens, while I have this sow and these little pigs.” The poor 
gods were at their wits’ end what to do. After a time they 
decided to slowly come and slay one of the little pigs, and 
then another, until they had slain all the pigs, and the sow too. 
When all were dead Indra began to weep and mourn. Then the 
gods ripped his pig body open and he came out of it, and 
began to laugh when he realised what a hideous dream he had 
had; he, the king of the gods, to have become a pig, and to 
think that the pig-life was the only life! Not only so, but to 
have wanted the whole universe to come into the pig life! The 
PuruSa, when it identifies itself with nature, forgets that it is 
pure and infinite. The PuruSa does not live; it is life itself. It 
does not exist; it is existence itself. The Soul does not know; 
it is knowledge itself. It is an entire mistake to say that the 
Soul lives, or knows, or loves. Love and existence are not the 
qualities of the PuruSa, but its essence. When they get 
reflected upon something you may call them the qualities of 
that something. But they are not the qualities of the PuruSa , 
but the essence of this great Atman, this Infinite Being, 
without birth or death. Who is established in His own glory, 
but appears as if become degenerate until if you approach to 
tell Him, “You are not a pig,” he begins to squeal and bite. 
Thus with us all in this Maya, this dream world, where it is all 
misery, weeping, and crying, where a few golden balls are 
rolled, and the world scrambles after them. You were never 
bound by laws, Nature never had a bond for you. That is what 
the Yogi tells you; have patience to learn it. And the Yogi 
shows how, by junction with this nature, and identifying itself 

71 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



with the mind and the world, the PuruSa thinks itself 
miserable. Then the Yogi goes on to show that the way out is 
through experience. You have to get all this experience, but 
finish it quickly. We have placed ourselves in this net, and 
will have to get out. We have got ourselves caught in the trap, 
and we will have to work out our freedom. So get this 
experience of husbands and wives, and friends, and little 
loves, and you will get through them safely if you never forget 
what you really are. Never forget this is only a momentary 
state, and that we have to pass through it. Experience is the 
one great teacher — experiences of pleasure and pain — but 
know they are only experiences, and will all lead, step by step, 
to that state when all these things will become small, and the 
PuruSa will be so great that this whole universe will be as a 
drop in the ocean, and will fall off by its own nothingness. We 
have to go through these experiences, but let us never forget 
the ideal. 

1 9 . p#I II ?SII 

visheshavisheshalinggamatralinggani 

gunnaparvani 

The states of the qualities are the defined, the 
undefined, the indicated only, and the signless. 

The system of Yoga is built entirely on the philosophy of the 
Sankhyas, as I told you in some of the previous lectures, and 
here again I will remind you of the cosmology of the Sankhya 
philosophy. According to the Sankhyas, nature is both the 
material and efficient cause of this universe. In this nature 
there are three sorts of materials, the Sattva, the Rajas, and the 



72 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Tamas. The Tcimcis material is all that is dark, all that is 
ignorant and heavy; and the Rajas is activity. The Sattvas is 
calmness, light. When nature is in the state before creation, it 
is called by them Avyaktam, undefined, or indiscrete; that is, 
in which there is no distinction of form or name, a state in 
which these three materials are held in perfect balance. Then 
the balance is disturbed, these different materials begin to 
mingle in various fashions, and the result is this universe. In 
every man, also, these three materials exist. When the Sattva 
material prevails knowledge comes. When the Rajas material 
prevails activity comes, and when the Tamas material prevails 
darkness comes and lassitude, idleness, ignorance. According 
to the Sankhya theory, the highest manifestation of this 
nature, consisting of these three materials, is what they call 
Mahat, or intelligence, universal intelligence, and each 
human mind is a part of that cosmic intelligence. Then out of 
Mahat comes the mind. In the Sankhya Psychology there is a 
sharp distinction between Manas, the mind function, and the 
function of the Buddhi intellect. The mind function is simply 
to collect and carry impressions and present them to the 
Buddhi, the individual Mahat, and the Buddhi determined 
upon it. So, out of Mahat comes mind, and out of mind comes 
fine material, and this fine material combines and becomes 
the gross material outside — the external universe. The claim 
of the Sankhya philosophy is that beginning with the intellect, 
and coming down to a block of stone, all has come out of the 
same thing, only as finer or grosser states of existence. The 
Buddhi is the finest state of existence of the materials, and 
then comes Ahamkara, egoism, and next to the mind comes 
fine material, which they call Tanmatras, which cannot be 
seen, but which are inferred. These Tanmatras combine and 

73 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



become grosser, and finally produce this universe. The finer is 
the cause, and the grosser is the effect. It begins with the 
Buddhi, which is the finest material, and goes on becoming 
grosser and grosser, until it becomes this universe. According 
to the Sankhya philosophy, beyond the whole of this nature is 
the PuruSa, which is not material at all. PuruSa is not at all 
similar to anything else, either Buddhi, or mind, or the 
Tanmatras, or the gross material; it is not akin to any one of 
these, it is entirely separate, entirely different in its nature, and 
from this they argue that the PuruSa must be immortal, 
because it is not the result of combination. That which is not 
the result of combination cannot die, these PuruSas or Souls 
are infinite in number. Now we shall understand the 
Aphorism, that the states of the qualities are defined, 
undefined, and signless. By the defined is meant the gross 
elements, which we can sense. By the undefined is meant the 
very fine materials, the Tanmatras, which cannot be sensed 
by ordinary men. If you practice Yoga, however, says 
Patanjali, after a while your perception will become so fine 
that you will actually see the Tanmatras. For instance, you 
have heard how every man has a certain light about him; 
every living being is emanating a certain light, and this, he 
says, can be seen by the Yogi. We do not all see it, but we are 
all throwing out these Tanmatras, just as a flower is 
continuously emanating these Tanmatras, which enable us to 
smell it. Every day of our lives we are throwing out a mass of 
good or evil, and everywhere we go the atmosphere is full of 
these materials, and that is how there came to the human 
mind, even unconsciously, the idea of building temples and 
churches? Why should man build churches in which to 
worship God? Why not worship Him anywhere? Even if he 

74 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



did not know the reason, man found that that place where 
people worshipped God became full of good Tanmatras. 
Every day people go there, and the more they go the holier 
they get, and the holier that place becomes. If any man who 
has not much Sattva in him goes there the place will influence 
him, and arouse his Sattva quality. Here, therefore, is the 
significance of all temples and holy places, but you must 
remember that their holiness depends on holy people 
congregating there. The difficulty with mankind is that they 
forget the original meaning, and put the cart before the horse. 
It was men who made these places holy, and then the effect 
became the cause and made men holy. If the wicked only 
were to go there it would become as bad as any other place. It 
is not the building, but the people, that make a church, and 
that is what we always forget. That is why sages and holy 
persons, who have so much of this Sattva quality, are 
emanating so much of it around them, and exerting a 
tremendous influence day and night on their surroundings. A 
man may become so pure that his purity will become tangible, 
as it were. The body has become pure, and in an intensely 
physical sense, no figurative idea, no poetical language, it 
emanates that purity wherever it goes. Whosoever comes in 
contact with that man becomes pure. Next “the indicated 
only” means the Buddhi, the intellect. “The indicated only” is 
the first manifestation of nature; from it all other 
manifestations proceed. The last is “the signless.” Here there 
seems to be a great fight between modern science and all 
religion. Every religion has this idea that this universe comes 
out of intelligence. Only some religions were more 
philosophical, and used scientific language. The very theory 
of God, taking it in its psychological significance, and apart 

75 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



from all ideas of personal God, is that intelligence is first in 
the order of creation, and that out of intelligence comes what 
we call gross matter. Modern philosophers say that 
intelligence is the last to come. They say that unintelligent 
things slowly evolve into animals, and from animals slowly 
evolve into men. They claim that instead of everything 
coming out of intelligence, intelligence is itself the last to 
come. Both the religious and the scientific statement, though 
seemingly directly opposed to each other, are true. Take an 
infinite series A — B — A — B — A — B, etc. The question is 
which is first, A or B. If you take the series as A — , you will 
say that A is first, but if you take it as B — A you will say that 
B is first. It depends on the way you are looking at it. 
Intelligence evolves, and becomes the gross material, and this 
again evolves as intelligence, and again evolves as matter 
once more. The Sankhyas, and all religionists, put intelligence 
first, and the series becomes intelligence then matter, 
intelligence then matter. The scientific man puts his finger on 
matter, and say matter then intelligence, matter then 
intelligence. But they are both indicating the same chain. 
Indian philosophy, however, goes beyond both intelligence 
and matter, and finds a PuruSa, or Self, which is beyond all 
intelligence, and of which intelligence is but the borrowed 
light. 

20. SET sfcmTE: II II 

drashta drishimatrah shuddhopi pratyayanupashyah 
The seer is intelligence only, and though pure, seen 
through the colouring of the intellect. 



76 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



This is again Sankhya philosophy. We have seen from this 
philosophy that from the lowest form up to intelligence all is 
nature, but beyond nature are PuruSas (souls), and these have 
no qualities. Then how does the soul appear to be happy or 
unhappy? By reflection. Just as if be piece of pure crystal be 
put on a table and a red flower be put near it, the crystal 
appears to be red, so all these appearances of happiness or 
unhappiness are but reflections; the soul itself has no sort of 
colouring. The soul is separate from nature; nature is one 
thing, soul another, eternally separate. The Sankhyas say that 
intelligence is a compounds, that it grows and wanes, that it 
changes, just as the body changes, and that its nature is nearly 
the same as that of the body. As a fingernail is to the body, so 
is body to intelligence. The nail is a part of the body, but it can 
be pared off hundreds of times, and the body will still last. 
Similarly, the intelligence lasts asons, while this body can be 
pared off, thrown off. Yet intelligence cannot be immortal, 
because is changes — growing and waning. Anything that 
changes cannot be immortal. Certainly intelligence is 
manufactured, and that very fact shows us that there must be 
something beyond that, because it cannot be free. Everything 
connected with matter is in nature, and therefore bound for 
ever. Who is free? That free one must certainly be beyond 
cause and effect. If you say that the idea of freedom is a 
delusion, I will say that the idea of bondage is also a delusion. 
Two facts come into our consciousness, and stand or fall by 
each other. One is that we are bound. If we want to go through 
a wall, and our head bumps against that wall, we are limited 
by that wall. At the same time we find will, and think we can 
direct our will everywhere. At every step these contradictory 
ideas are coming to us. We have to believe that we are free, 

77 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



yet at every moment we find we are not free. If one idea is a 
delusion, the other is also a delusion, because both stand upon 
the same basis — consciousness. The Yogi says both are true; 
that we are bound so far as intelligence goes, that we are free 
as far as the soul is concerned. It is the real nature of man, the 
Soul, the PuruSa, which is beyond all law of causation. Its 
freedom is percolating through layers and layers of matter, in 
various forms of intelligence, and mind, and all these things. 
It is its light which is shining through all. Intelligence has no 
light of its own. Each organ has a particular centre in the 
brain; it is not that all the organs have one centre; each organ 
is separate. Why do all these perceptions harmonise, and 
where do they get their unity? If it were in the brain there 
would be one centre only for the eyes, the nose, the ears, 
while we know for certain that there are different centres for 
each. But a man can see and hear at the same time, so a unity 
must be back of intelligence. Intelligence is eternally 
connected with the brain, but behind even intelligence stands 
the PuruSa, the unit, where all these different sensations and 
perceptions join and become one. Soul itself is the centre 
where all the different organs converge and become unified, 
and that Soul is free, and it is its freedom that tells you every 
moment that you are free. But you mistake, and mingle that 
freedom every moment with intelligence and mind. You try to 
attribute that freedom to the intelligence, and immediately 
find that intelligence is not free; you attribute that freedom to 
the body, and immediately nature tells you that you are again 
mistaken. That is why there is this mingled sense of freedom 
and bondage at the same time. The Yogi analyses both what is 
free and what is bound, and his ignorance vanishes. He finds 
that the PuruSa is free, is the essence of that knowledge 

78 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



which, coming through the Buddhi, becomes intelligence, 
and, as such, is bound. 

21. II 3? II 

tadarth eva drishyasyatma 

The nature of the experience is for him. 

Nature has no light of its own. As long as the PuruSa is 
present in it, it appears light, but the light is borrowed; just as 
the moon’s light is reflected. All the manifestations of nature 
are caused by this nature itself, according to the Yogis', but 
nature has no purpose in view, except to free the PuruSa. 

22. fdrf II 33 II 

kritarthan prati nashtam apyanashtan 
tadanyasadharannatvat 

Though destroyed for him whose goal has been 
gained, yet is not destroyed, being common to others. 

The whole idea of this nature is to make the Soul know that it 
is entirely separate from nature, and when the Soul knows 
this, nature has no more attractions for it. But the whole of 
nature vanishes only for that man who has become free. There 
will always remain an infinite number of others, for whom 
nature will go on working. 

23. T^limiTtdl: II 33. II 

svcisvamishaktyoh svaroopopalabdhihetuh sanyogah 
Junction is the cause of the realisation of the nature of 

79 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



both the powers, the experienced and its Lord. 

According to this aphorism, when this Soul comes into 
conjunction with nature, both the power of the Soul and the 
power of nature become manifest in this conjunction, and all 
these manifestations are thrown out. Ignorance is the cause of 
this conjunction. We see every day that the cause of our pain 
or pleasure is always our joining ourselves with the body. If I 
were perfectly certain that I am not this body, I should take no 
notice of heat and cold, or anything of the kind. This body is a 
combination. It is only a fiction to say that I have one body, 
you another, and the sun another. The whole universe is one 
ocean of matter, and you are the name of a little particle, and I 
of another, and the sun of another. We know that this matter is 
continuously changing, what is forming the sun one day, the 
next day may form the matter of our bodies. 

24. II RVII 

tasya heturavidya 
Ignorance is its cause. 

Through ignorance we have joined ourselves with a particular 
body, and thus opened ourselves to misery. This idea of body 
is a simple superstition. It is superstition that makes us 
happy or unhappy. It is superstition caused by ignorance that 
makes us feel heat and cold, pain and pleasure. It is our 
business to rise above this superstition, and the Yogi shows us 
how we can do this. It has been demonstrated that, under 
certain mental conditions, a man may be burned, yet, while 
that condition lasts, he will feel no pain. The difficulty is that 



80 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



this sudden upheaval of the mind comes like a whirlwind one 
minute, and goes away the next. If, however, we attain it 
scientifically, through Yoga, we shall permanently attain to 
that separation of Self from the body. 

25. clfST: II ^ II 

tadabhavat sanyogabhavo hanan taddrisheh 
kaivalyam 

There being absence of that (ignorance) there is 
absence of junction, which is the 
thing-to-be-avoided; that is the independence of the 
seer. 

According to this Yoga philosophy it is through ignorance that 
the Soul has been joined with nature and the idea is to get rid 
of nature’s control over us. That is the goal of all religions. 
Each Soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest this 
Divinity within, by controlling nature, external and internal. 
Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or by 
philosophy, by one, or more, or all of these - and be free. This 
is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or rituals, or 
books, or temples, or forms, are but secondary details. The 
Yogi tries to reach this goal through psychic control. Until we 
can free ourselves from nature we are slaves; as she dictates 
so we must go. The Yogi claims that he who controls mind 
controls matter also. The internal nature is much higher that 
the external, and much more difficult to grapple with, much 
more difficult to control; therefore he who has conquered the 
internal nature controls the whole universe; it becomes his 
servant. Raja Yoga propounds the methods of gaining this 

81 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



control. Higher forces than we know in physical nature will 
have to be subdued. This body is just the external crust of the 
mind. They are not two different things; they are just as the 
oyster and its shell. They are but two aspects of one thing; 
the internal substance of the oyster is taking up matter from 
outside, and manufacturing the shell. In the same way these 
internal fine forces which are called mind take up gross matter 
from outside, and from that manufacture this external shell, or 
body. If then, we have control of the internal, it is very easy to 
have control of the external. Then again, these forces are not 
different. It is not that some forces are physical, and some 
mental; the physical forces are but the gross manifestations of 
the fine forces, just as the physical world is but the gross 
manifestation of the fine world. 

26 . II II 

vivekakhyatiraviplava hanopayah 

The means of destruction of ignorance is unbroken 
practice of discrimination. 

This is the real goal of practice — discrimination between the 
real and unreal, knowing that the PuruSa is not nature, that it 
is neither matter nor mind, and that because it is not nature, it 
cannot possibly change. It is only nature which changes, 
combining, and recombining, dissolving continually. When 
through constant practice we begin to discriminate, ignorance 
will vanish, and the PuruSa will begin to shine in its real 
nature, omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent. 



82 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



27. cT^f TO II Rvs II 

tasya saptadhaa prantabhoomih prajna 

His knowledge is of the sevenfold highest ground. 

When this knowledge comes, it will come, as it were, in seven 
grades, one after the other, and when one of these has begun 
we may know that we are getting knowledge. The first to 
appear will be that we have known what is to be known. The 
mind will cease to be dissatisfied. While we are aware of 
thirsting after knowledge we begin to seek here and there, 
wherever we think we can get some truth, and, failing to find 
it we become dissatisfied and seek in a fresh direction. All 
search is vain, until we begin to perceive that knowledge is 
within ourselves, that no one can help us, that we must help 
ourselves. When we begin to practice the power of 
discrimination, the first sign that we are getting near truth will 
be that that dissatisfied state will vanish. We shall feel quite 
sure that we have found the truth, and that it cannot be 
anything else but the truth. Then we may know that the sun is 
rising, that the morning is breaking for us, and, taking 
courage, we must persevere until the goal is reached. The 
second grade will be that all pains will be gone. It will be 
impossible for anything in the universe, physical, mental, or 
spiritual, to give us pain. The third will be that we shall get 
full knowledge, that omniscience will be ours. Next will come 
what is called freedom of the Chitta. We shall realise that all 
these difficulties and struggles have fallen off from us. All 
these vacillations of the mind, when the mind cannot be 
controlled, have failed down, just as a stone falls from the 
mountain top into the valley and never comes up again. The 

83 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



next will be that this China itself will realise that it melts 
away into its causes whenever we so desire. Lastly we shall 
find that we are established in our Self, that we have been 
alone throughout the universe, neither body nor mind was 
ever connected with us, much less joined to us. They were 
working their own way, and we, through ignorance, joined 
ourselves to them. But we have been alone, omnipotent, 
omnipresent, ever blessed; our own Self was so pure and 
perfect that we required none else. We required none else to 
make us happy, for we are happiness itself. We shall find that 
this knowledge does not depend on anything else; throughout 
the universe there can be nothing that will not become 
effulgent before our knowledge. This will be the last state, 
and the Yogi will become peaceful and calm, never to feel any 
more pain, never to be again deluded, never to touch misery. 
He knows he is ever blessed, ever perfect, almighty. 



28 . WWf: II II 

yogangganushthanad ashuddhikshaye jnanadiptira 
vivekakhyateh 



By the practice of the different parts of Yoga the 
impurities being destroyed knowledge becomes 
effulgent, up to discrimination. 

Now comes the practical knowledge. What we have just been 
speaking about is much higher. It is way above our heads, but 
it is the ideal. It is first necessary to obtain physical and 
mental control. Then the realisation will become steady in 
that ideal. The ideal being known, what remains is to practise 
the method of reaching it. 



84 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



29. 



37|flH II II 

yamaniyamasanapranayamapratyaharadharanadhy 
anasamadhayo-a-shtava anggani 
Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratya ham, 
Dharana, Dhyana, Samadhi, are the limbs of Yoga. 

30. RTT: II II 

ahinsasatyasteyabrahmacharyaparigraha yamah 
Non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, 
and non-receiving, are called Yama. 

A man who wants to be a perfect Yogi must give up the sex 
idea. The Soul has no sex; why should it degrade itself with 
sex ideas? Later we shall understand better why these ideas 
must be given up. Receiving is just as bad as stealing; 
receiving gifts from others. Whoever receives gifts, his mind 
is acted on by the mind of the giver, so that the man who 
receives gifts becomes degenerated. Receiving gifts destroys 
the independence of the mind, and makes us mere slaves. 
Therefore, receive nothing. 

3 1 . Tmd^lddcWH^Hdl^l: TIRRRT HtHdchf II \U\ 

jatideshakalasamayanavachchhinnah 
sarvabhauma mahavratam 



85 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



These, unbroken by time, place, purpose, and caste, 
are (universal) great vows. 

These practices, non-killing, non-stealing, chastity, and 
non-receiving, are to be practiced by every man, woman and 
child, by every soul, irrespective of nation, country or 
position. 

32. ffll: II X3 II 

shciuchasantoshcitapahsvadhyayeshvara- 
pranidhanani niyamah 

Internal and external purification, contentment, 
mortification, study, and worship of God, are the 
Niyamas. 

External purification is keeping the body pure; a dirty man 
will never become a Yogi. There must be internal purification 
also. That is obtained by the first-named virtues. Of course 
internal purity is of greater value that external, but both are 
necessary, and external purity, without internal, is of no good. 

33. kldidl'Td II XX II 

vitarkabadhane pratipakshabhavanam 
To obstruct thoughts which are inimical to Yoga 
contrary thoughts will be brought. 

This is the way to practice all these virtues that have been 
stated, by holding thoughts of an opposite character in the 
mind. When the idea of stealing comes, non-stealing should 



86 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



be thought of. When the idea of receiving gifts comes, replace 
it by a contrary thought. 

34. RcTTT T%TT^f: $d4JKdl*j4lKcTT 

ipwp ?Td ^Vll 

vitarkaa hinsadayah kritakaritanumodita 
lobhakrodhamohapoorvaka 
mridumadhyadhimatra duhkhajnananantafala iti 
pratipakshabhavanam 

The obstructions to Yoga are killing etc., whether 
committed, caused, or approved; either through 
avarice, or anger, or ignorance; whether slight, 
middling, or great, and result is innumerable 
ignorances and miseries. This is (the method of) 
thinking the contrary. 

If I tell I lie, or cause another to tell a lie, or approve of 
another doing so, it is equally sinful. If it is a very mild lie, it is 
still a lie. Every vicious thought will rebound, every thought 
of hatred which you have thought, in a cave even, is stored up, 
and will one day come back to you with tremendous power in 
the form of some misery here. If you project all sorts of hatred 
and jealousy, they will rebound on you with compound 
interest. No power can avert them; when once you have put 
them in motion you will have to bear them. Remembering 
this, will prevent you from doing wicked things. 



87 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



35. 3#HIMfcl8Wi II V\W 

ahimsapratishthayam tatsannidhau vairatyagah 

Non-killing being established, in his presence all 
emnities cease (in others). 

If a man gets the idea of non-injuring others, before him even 
animals which are by their nature ferocious will become 
peaceful. The tiger and the lamb will play together before that 
Yogi and will not hurt each other. When you have come to 
that state, then alone you will understand that you have 
become firmly established in non-injuring. 

36. II ^ II 

satyap ratishthayam kriyafa lashrayatvam 
By the establishment of truthfulness the Yogi gets the 
power of attaining for himself and others the fruits of 
work without the works. 



When this power of truth will be established with you, then 
even in dream you will never tell an untruth, in thought, word 
or deed; whatever you say will be truth. You may say to a man 
“Be blessed,” and that man will be blessed. If a man is 
diseased, and you say to him, “Be thou cured,” he will be 
cured immediately. 



37. 




II Vs II 



asteyapratishthayam sarvaratnopasthanam 



By the establishment of non-stealing all wealth 



88 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



comes to the Yogi. 

The more you fly from nature the more she follows you, and if 
you do not care for her at all she becomes your slave. 

38. flfelfl: II ^11 

brahmacharyapratishthayam viryalabhah 

By the establishment of continence energy is gained. 

The chaste brain has tremendous energy, gigantic will power, 
without that there can be no mental strength. All men of 
gigantic brains are very continent. It gives wonderful control 
over mankind. Leaders of men have been very continent, and 
this is what gave them power. Therefore the Yogi must be 
continent. 

39. II ^ II 

aparigrahasthairye janmakathantasanbodhah 
When he is fixed in non-receiving he gets the 
memory of past life. 

When the Yogi does not receive presents from others he does 
not become beholden to others, but becomes independent and 
free, and his mind becomes pure, because with every gift he 
receives all the evils of the giver, and they come and lay 
coating after coating on his mind, until it is hidden under all 
sorts of coverings of evil. If he does not receive the mind 
becomes pure, and the first thing it gets is memory of past life. 

89 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Then alone the Yogi becomes perfectly fixed in his ideal, 
because he sees that he has been coming and going so many 
times, and he becomes determined that this time he will be 
free, that he will no more come and go, and be the slave of 
Nature. 

40. TOTfTR: II II 

shauchat svanggajugupsa parairasansargah 
Internal and external cleanliness being established, 
arises disgust for one’s own body, and 
non-intercourse with other bodies. 

When there is real purification of the body, external and 
internal, there arises neglect of the body, and all this idea of 
keeping it nice will vanish. What others call the most 
beautiful face to the Yogi will appear to be an animal’s face, if 
there is not intelligence behind it. What the world will call a 
very common face he will call heavenly, if that spirit shines 
behind it. This thirst after body is the great bane of human life. 
So, when this purity is established, the first sign will be that 
you do not care to think you are a body. It is only when 
purity comes that we get rid of this body idea. 

41. Kill H H HI 4 1 K 4 4 4 1 cH d* H 4F4^TR ^ II V? II 

sattvashuddhisaumanasyaikagryendriyajayatmadars 
hanayojnatvani cha 

There also arises purification of the Sattva, 
cheerfulness of the mind, concentration, conquest of 



90 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the organs, and fitness for the realisation of the Self. 

By this practice the Sattva material will prevail, and the mind 
will become concentrated and cheerful. The first sign that you 
are become religious is that you are becoming cheerful. When 
a man is gloomy that may be dyspepsia, but it is not religion. 
A pleasurable feeling is the nature of the Sattva. Everything is 
pleasurable to the Sattvika man, and when this comes, know 
that you are progressing in Yoga. All pain is caused by Tamas, 
so you must get rid of that; moroseness is one of the results of 
Tamas. The strong, the well-knit, the young, the healthy, the 
daring alone are fit to be Yogis. To the Yogi everything is bliss, 
every human face that he sees brings cheerfulness to him. 
That is the sign of a virtuous man. Misery is caused by sin, 
and by no other cause. What business have you with clouded 
faces; it is terrible. If you have a clouded face do not go out 
that day, shut yourself up in your room. What right have you 
to carry this disease out into the world? When your mind has 
become controlled you will have control over the whole body; 
instead of being a slave to the machine, the machine will be 
your slave. Instead of this machine being able to drag the soul 
down it will be its greatest helpmate. 

42. II VR II 

santoshad anuttamah sukhalabhah 

From contentment comes superlative happiness. 

43. II II 

kayendriyasiddhirashuddhikshayat tapasah 

The result of mortification is bringing powers to the 



91 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



organs and the body, by destroying the impurity. 

The results of mortification are seen immediately sometimes 
by heightened powers of vision, and so on, hearing things at a 
distance, etc. 



44. II VVII 

svadhyayad ishtadevatasanp rayogah 

By repetition of the mantram comes the realisation of 
the intended deity. 

The higher the beings that you want to get the harder is the 
practice. 

45. TFTTTN Rrl hsyi II VMI 

samadhisiddhirishvarapranidhanat 
By sacrificing all to Isvara comes Samadhi. 

By resignation to the Lord, Samadhi becomes perfect. 

46. II W II 

sthirasukham aasanam 

Posture is that which is firm and pleasant. 

Now comes Asana , posture. Until you can get a firm seat you 
cannot practice the breathing and other exercises. The seat 
being firm means that you do not feel the body at all; then 
alone it has become firm. But, in the ordinary way, you will 
find that as soon as you sit for a few minutes all sorts of 



92 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



disturbances come into the body; but when you have got 
beyond the idea of a concrete body you will lose all sense of 
the body. You will feel neither pleasure nor pain. And when 
you take your body up again it will feel so rested; it is the only 
perfect rest that you can give to the body. When you have 
succeeded in conquering the body and keeping it firm, your 
practice will remain firm, but while you are disturbed by the 
body your nerves become disturbed, and you cannot 
concentrate the mind. We can make the seat firm by thinking 
of the infinite. We cannot think of the Absolute Infinite, but 
we can think of the infinite sky. 

prayatnashaithilyanantasamapattibhyam 

By slight effort and meditating on the unlimited 
(posture becomes firm and pleasant). 

Light and darkness, pleasure and pain, will not then disturb 
you. 



48. chTT S^TTWcT: II ^ II 

tato dvandvanabhighatah 

Seat being conquered, the dualities do not obstruct. 

The dualities are good and bad, heat and cold, and all the pairs 
of opposites. 



93 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



49. MNINIH: II W II 

tasmin sati shvasaprashvasayorgativichchhedah 
pranayamah 

Controlling the motion of the exhalation and the 
inhalation follows after this. 

When the posture has been conquered, then this motion is to 
be broken and controlled, and thus we come to Pranayama; 
the controlling of the vital forces of the body. Prana is not 
breath, though it is usually so translated. It is the sum-total 
of the cosmic energy. It is the energy that is in each obdy, and 
its most apparent manifestation is the motion of the lungs. 
This motion is caused by Prana drawing in the breath, and is 
what we seek to control in Pranayama. We begin by 
controlling the breaht, as the easiest way of getting control of 
the Prana. 



50. qfest 

II V II 

bahyabhyantarastambhavrittih 
deshakalasankhyabhih paridrishto dirghasookshmah 
Its modifications are either external or internal, or 
motionless, regulated by place, time, and number, 
either long or short. 

The three sorts of motion of this Pranayama are, one by 
which we draw the breath in, another by which we throw it 



94 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



out, and the third action is when the breath is held in the lungs, 
or stopped from entering the lungs. These, again, are varied 
by place and time. By place is meant that the Prana is held to 
some particular part of the body. By time is meant ho wlong 
the Prana should be confined to a certain place, and so we are 
told how many seconds to keep on motion, and how many 
seconds to keep another. The result of this Pranayama is 
Udghata, awakening the Kundalini. 

bahyabhyantaravishayakshepi chaturthah 

The fourth is restraining the Prana by directing it 

either to the external or internal objects. 

This is the fourth sort of Pranayama. Prana can be directed 
either inside or outside. 

52. cTcT: || ^ || 

dharanasu ch yojnata manasah 

From that, the covering to the light of the Chitta is 

attenuated. 

The Chitta has, by its own nature, all knowledge. It is made of 
Sattva particles, but is covered by Rajas and Tamas particles, 
and by Pranayama this covering is removed. 



95 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



53. II *vUI 



The mind becomes fit for Dharana. 

After this covering has been removed we are able to 
concentrate the mind. 

54. ^^4M4hT|4h ^K4|U|i 

M^-llfiK: II WII 

svasvavishayasanprayoge chittasy svaroopanukar 
ivendriyanan pratyaharah 

The drawing in of the organs is by their giving up 
their own objects and taking the form of the 
mind- stuff. 

These organs are separate states of the mind-stuff. I see a 
book; the form is not in the book, it is in the mind. Something 
is outside which calls that form up. The real form is in the 
Chitta. These organs are identifying themselves with, and 
taking the forms of whatever comes to them. If you can 
restrain the mind- stuff from taking these forms the mind will 
remain calm. This is called Pratyahara. Thence arises 
supreme control of the organs. 

When the Yogi has succeeded in preventing the organs from 
taking the forms of external objects, and in making them 
remain one with the mind-stuff, then comes perfect control of 
the organs, and when the orgns are perfectly under control, 

96 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



every muscle and nerve will be under control, because the 
organs are the centres of all the senstations, and of all actions. 
These organs are divided into organs of work and organs of 
sensation. When the organs are controlled the Yogi can 
control all feeling and doing; the whole of the body will be 
under his control. Then alone one begins to feel joy in being 
born; then one can truthfully say, “Blessed am I that I was 
born. “ When that control of the organs is obtained, we feel 
how wonderful this body really is 2 . 



2 There are 55 sutras in many versions of Patanjali Yoga Sutra. The 55th 

Sutra is cfcf: hTUT II hh II "Pratyahara results in the absolute 

control of the sense organs”. Swami Vivekananda has not commented 
upon this sutra 



97 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



CHAPTER III - YIBHOOTI PADA 

THE CHAPTER OF POWERS 

II II 



We have now come to the chapter which is called the Chapter 
of Powers. 

1. n ? n 

deshabandhashchittasya dharana 

Dharana is holding the mind on to some particular 
object. 

Dharana (concentration) is when the mind holds on to some 
object, either in the body, or outside the body, and keeps itself 
in that state. 

2. cf=T Mc^kdlddl II R II 

tatrci pratyayaikatanata dhyanam 

An unbroken flow of knowledge to that object is 
Dhyana. 

The mind tries to think of one object, to hold itself to one 
particular spot, as the top of the head, the heart, etc., and if the 
mind succeeds in receiving the sensations only through that 
part of the body, and through no other part, that would be 
Dharana , and when the mind succeeds in keeping itself in 
that state for some time it is called Dhyana (meditation). 



98 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



3. ^ TRTN: II XII 

tad evarthamatranirbhasan svaroopaslioonyam iva 
samadhih 

When that, giving up all forms, reflects only the 
meaning, it is Samadhi. 

That is, when in meditation all forms are given up. Suppose 1 
were meditating on a book, and that 1 have gradually 
succeeded in concentrating the mind on it, and perceiving 
only the internal sensations, the meaning, unexpressed in any 
form, that state of Dhyana is called Samadhi. 

4. II VII 

trayam ekatra sanyamah 

(These) three (when practised) in regard to one object 
is Sarny ama. 

When a man can direct his mind to any particular object and 
fix it there, and then keep it there for a long time, separating 
the object from the internal part, this is Samyama ; or 
Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi, one following the other, 
and making one. The form of the thing has vanished, and only 
its meaning remains in the mind. 

5. d^4lcfWTSS^lT: II Ml 

tajjayat prajnaalokah 



99 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



By the conquest of that comes light of knowledge. 

When one has succeeded in making this Samyama , all powers 
come under his control. This is the great instrument of the 
Yogi. The object of knowledge are infinite, and they are 
divided into the gross, grosser, grossest, and the fine, finer, 
finest, and so on. This Samyama should be first applied to 
gross things, when when you begin to get knowledge of the 
gross, slowly, by stages, it should be brought to finer things. 

6. II Ml 

tasya bhoomishu viniyogah 

That should be employed in stages. This is a note of 
warning not to attempt to go too fast. 

7. WfSRBjf II « II 

trayam antaranggan poorvebhyah 

These three are nearer than those that precede. 

Before these we had the Pranayama, the Asana, the Yama 
and Niyama ; these are external parts of these three — 
Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi. Yet these latter even are 
external to the seedless Samadhi. When a man has attained to 
them he may attain to omniscience and omnipresence, but that 
would not be salvation. These three would not make the mind 
Nirvikalpa, changeless, but would leave the seeds for getting 
bodies again; only when the seeds are, as the Yogi says, 
“fried,” do they lose the possibility of producing further 
plants. These powers cannot fry the seed. 



100 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



8. II <JII 

tad api bahiranggan nirbijasy 

But even they are external to the seedless ( Samadhi ). 

Compared with that seedless Samadhi, therefore, even these 
are external. We have not yet reached the real Samadhi, the 
highest, but to a lower stage, in which this universe still exists 
as we see it, and in which are all these power. 



•s r\ r\ *s 




MtNHK'JIIH: II ^ II 

vyutthananirodhasanskarayorabhibhava- 
pradurbhavau nirodhakshannachittanvayo 
nirodhaparinamah 

By the suppression of the disturbed modifications of 
the mind, and by the rise of modifications of control, 
the mind is said to attain the controlling 
modifications - following the controlling powers of 
the mind. 

That is to say, in this first state of Samadhi, the modifications 
of the mind have been controlled, but not perfectly, because if 
they were, there would be no modifications. If there is a 
modification which impels the mind to rush out through the 
senses, and the Yogi tries to control it, that very control itself 
will be a modification. One wave will be checked by another 
wave, so it will not be real Samadhi, when all the waves have 



101 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



subsided, as control itself will be a wave. Yet this lower 
Samadhi is very much nearer to the higher Samadhi than 
when the mind comes bubbling out. 

10. ^IKHlfefT 'H'WdildL II Ml 

tasya prashantavahita sanskarat 

Its flow becomes steady by habit. 

The flow of this continuous control of the mind becomes 
steady when practices day after day and the mind obtains the 
faculty of constant concentration. 

11. ftrlFT TFTTT^^TFT: II Ml 

sarvarthataikagratayoh kshciyodayau chittasya 
samadhiparinamah 

Taking in all sorts of objects and concentrating upon 
one object, these two powers being destroyed and 
manifested respectively, the Chitta gets the modifi- 
cation called Samadhi. 

The mind is taking up various objects, running into all sorts of 
things and then there is a higher state of the mind, when it 
takes up one object and excludes all others. Samadhi is the 
result of that. 



12. clef: ’JT STRTTT^fr H-d^lildlMK'JIFT: m II 

tatah punah shantoditau tulyapratyayau 
chittasyaikagrataparinamah 



102 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



The one-pointedness of the China is when it grasps in 
one, the past and present. 

How are we to know that the mind has become concentrated? 
Because time will vanish. The more time vanishes the more 
concentrated we are. In common life we see that when were 
are interested in a book we do not note the time at all, and 
when we leave the book we are often surprised to find how 
many hours have passed. All time will have the tendency to 
come and stand in the one present. So the definition is given, 
when the past and present come and stand in one, the more 
concentrated the mind. 

13. TTd ot|K«i|ldl: II II 

etena bhootendriyeshu dharmalakshanavastha 
parinama vyakhyatah 

By this is explained the threefold transformations of 
form, time and state, in fine or gross matter, and in the 
organs. 

By this the threefold changes in the mind-stuff as to form, 
time, and state are explained. The mind-stuff is changing into 
Vrttis, this is change as to form. To be able to hold the changes 
to the present time is change as to time. To be able to make 
the mind-stuff go to the past forms giving up the present even, 
is change as to state. The concentrations taught in the 
preceding aphorisms were to give the Yogi a voluntary control 
over the transformations of his mind- stuff which alone will 
enable him to make the Samyama before named. 



103 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



14. wf II ?* II 

shantoditavyapadeshyadharmanupati dharmi 

That which is acted upon by transformations, either 
past, present or yet to be manifested, is the qualified. 

That is to say, the qualified is the substance which is being 
acted upon by time and by the Samskaras, and getting 
changed and being manifested all the time. 

15 . thHMrd TRUlWMcd mil 

kramanyatvan parinamanyatve hetuh 

The succession of changes is the cause of manifold 

evolution. 

16. TRU|W44^^Kd)dMbld^lMtf m II 

parinamatrayasanyamadatitanagatajnanam 

By making Samyama on the three sorts of changes 
comes the knowledge of past and future. 

We must not lose sight of the first definition of Samyama. 
When the mind has attained to that state when it identifies 
itself with the internal impression of the object, leaving the 
external, and when, by long practice, that is retained by the 
mind, and the mind can get into that state in a moment, that is 
Samyama. If a man in that state wants to know the past and 
future he has to make a Samyama on the changes in the 
Samskaras. Some are working now at present, some have 
worked out, and some are waiting to work; so by making a 



104 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Samyama on these he knows the past and future. 




II ^11 

shabdarthapratyayanam itaretaradhyasat sankarah 
tatpravibhagasanyamat sarvabhootarutajnanam 

By making Samyama on word, meaning, and 
knowledge, which are ordinarily confused, comes the 
knowledge of all animal sounds. 

The word represents the external cause, the meaning 
represents the internal vibration that travels to the brain 
through the channels of the Indriyas, conveying the external 
impression to the mind, and knowledge represents the 
reaction of the mind, with which comes perception. These 
three confused, make our sense objects. Suppose I hear a 
word; there is first the external vibration, next the internal 
sensation carried to the mind by the organ of hearing, then the 
mind reacts, and I know the word. The word 1 know is a 
mixture of the three, vibration, sensation, and reaction. 
Ordinarily these three are inseperable; but by practice the 
Yogi can separate them. When a man has attained to this, if he 
makes a Samyama on any sound, he understands the meaning 
which that sound was intended to express, whether it was 
made by man or by any other animal. 

18 . ^Ild^lMH, II II 

sanskarasakshatkaranat poorvajatijnanam 



105 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



By perceiving the impressions, knowledge of past 
life. 

Each experience that we have comes in the form of a wave in 
the Chitta , and this subsides and becomes finer and finer, but 
is never lost. It remains there in minute form, and if we can 
bring this wave up again, it becomes memory. So, if the Yogi 
can make a Samyama on these past impressions in the mind, 
he will begin to remember all his past lives. 

19. II n II 

pratyayasy pamchittajnanam 

By making Samyama on the signs in another’s both 

knowledge of that mind comes. 

Suppose each man has particular signs on his body, which 
differentiate him from others; when the Yogi makes a 
Samyama on these signs peculiar to a certain man he knows 
the nature of the mind of that person. 

20. H ^ ^ I N II Ro II 

na cha tat salambanan,tasyavishayibhootatvat 

But not its contents, that not being the object of the 

Samyama. 

He would not know the contents of the mind by making a 
Samyama on the body. There would be required a twofold 
Samyama, first on the signs in the body, and then on the mind 
itself. The Yogi would then know everything that is in that 



106 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



mind, past, present, and future. 



21. 

NR? II 

kayaroopasanyamat tadgrahyashaktistambhe 
chakshuhprakashasanprayogentardhanam 

By making Samyama on the form of the body the 
power of perceiving forms being obstructed, the 
power of manifestation in the eye being separated, the 
Yogi's body becomes unseen. 

A Yogi standing in the midst of this room can apparently 
vanish. He does not really vanish, but he will not be seen by 
anyone. The form and the body are, as it were, separated. You 
must remember that this can only be done when the Yogi has 
attained to that power of concentration when form and the 
thing formed have been separated. Then he makes a Samyama 
on that, and the power to perceive forms is obstructed, 
because the power of perceiving forms comes from the 
junction of form and the thing formed. 

22. II RR II 

etena shabdadyantardhanamuktam 

By this the disappearance or concealment of words 

which are being spoken is also explained. 



107 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



23. HWT ^ 

3TROTIWT II II 

sopakraman nirupakraman cha karma tatsanyamad 
aparantajnanam,arishtebhyo va 

Karma is of two kinds, soon to be fructified, and late 
to be fructified. By making Sarny ama on that, or by 
the signs called Aristha, portents, the Yogis know the 
exact time of separation from their bodies. 

When the Yogi makes a Samyama on his own Karma, upon 
those impressions in his mind which are now working, and 
those which are just waiting to work, he knows exactly by 
those that are waiting when his body will fall. He knows when 
he will die, at what hour, even at what minute. The Hindus 
think very much of that knowledge or consciousness of the 
nearness of death, because it is taught in the Gita that the 
thoughts at the moment of departure are great powers in 
determining the next life. 

24. IRVII 

maitryadishu balani 

By making Samyama on friendship, etc., various 
strength comes. 



108 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



25. IRHII 

baleshu hastibaladini 

By making Samyama on the strength of the elephant, 
etc., that strength comes to the Yogi. 

When a Yogi has attained to this Samyama and wants strength, 
he makes a Samyama on the strength of the elephant, and gets 
it. Infinite energy is at the disposal of everyone, if he only 
knows how to get it. The Yogi has discovered the science of 
getting it. 

26. II ^ II 

pravrittyalokanyasat sookshmavyavahita- 
vip rakrishta jnanam 

By making Samyama on that effulgent light comes 
the knowledge of the fine, the obstructed, and the 
remote. 

When the Yogi makes Samyama on that effulgent light in the 
heart he sees things which are very remote, things, for 
instance, that are happening in a distant place, and which are 
obstructed by mountain barriers and also things which are 
very fine. 

27. ^dHsIH ^ fhWIcf II II 

bhuvanajnanan soorye sanyamat 

By making Samyama on the sun, (comes) the 



109 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



knowledge of the world. 

28. II II 

chandre taravyoohajnanam 

On the moon, (comes) the knowledge of the cluster of 
stars. 

29. ^djtfa^MHJIWI 

dhruve tadgatijnanam 

On the pole star (comes) the knowledge of the 
motions of the stars. 

30. II II 

ncibhichakre kayavyooha jnanam 

On the navel circle (comes) the knowledge of the 
constitution of the body. 




kanthakoope kshutpipasanivrittih 

On the hollow of the throat (comes) cessation of 
hunger. 

When a man is very hungry, if he can make Samyama on the 
pit of the throat hunger ceases. 



110 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



32. 'fcHHI'sSMi Wl II Xk II 

koormanadyan sthairyam 

On the nerve called Kurma (comes) fixity of the 
body. 

When he is practising the body is not disturbed. 

33. T^WlldlN II ^ II 

moordhajyotishi siddhadarshanam 

On the light emanating from the top of the head sight 
of the Siddhas. 

The Siddhas are beings who are a little above ghosts. When 
the Yogi concentrates his mind on the sop of his head he will 
see these Siddhas. The word Siddha does not refer to those 
men who have become free — a sense in which it is often used. 

34. 3T ^1% II II 

pratibhad va sarvam 

Or by the power of Pratibha all knowledge. 

All these can come without any Samyama to the man who has 
the power of Pratibha. (enlightenment from purity). This is 
when a man has risen to a high state of Pratibha ; then he has 
that great light. All things are apparent to him. Everything 
comes to him naturally, without making Samyama on 
anything. 



Ill 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



35. II ^ II 

hridaye chittasanvit 

In the heart, knowledge of minds. 

II ^ II 

sattvapurushayoratyantasankeernnayoh 
prcityayavishesho bhogah pararthatvat 
svarthasanyamat purushajnanam 

Enjoyment comes by the non-discrimination of the 
very distant soul and Sattva. Its actions are for 
another; Samyama on this gives knowledge of the 
Purusa. 

This power of non-attachment acquired through purity gives 
the Yogi the enlightenment called Pratibha. 



37. cTcT: 




^TERT II Vs II 



tat ah pmtibhashravannavedanadarshasvadavarta 

jayante 

From that arises the knowledge of hearing, touching, 
seeing, tasting, and smelling, belonging to Pratibha. 



38. ^ 




IIVSII 



te samadhavupasargaa vyutthane siddhayah 



112 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



These are obstacles to Samadhi; but they are powers 
in the worldly state. 

If the Yogi knows all these enjoyments of the world it comes 
by the junction of the PuruSa and the mind. If he wants to 
make Samyama on this, that they are two different things, 
nature and soul, he gets knowledge of the PuruSa. From that 
arises discrimination. When he has got that discrimination he 
gets the Pratibha, the light of supreme genius. These 
powers, however, are obstructions to the attainment of the 
highest goal, the knowledge of the pure Self, and freedom; 
these are, as it were, to be met in the way, and if the Yogi 
rejects them, he attains the highest. If he is tempted to acquire 
these, his farther progress is barred. 

39. farR*I T<*KKM*I: II ^3 II 

bandhakarannashaithilyat prachamsanvedanach ch 
chittasya parashariraveshah 

When the cause of bondage has become loosened, the 
Yogi, by his knowledge of manifestation through the 
organs, enters another’s body. 

The Yogi can enter a dead body, and make it get up and move, 
even while he himself is working in another body. Or he can 
enter a living body, and hold that man’s mind and organs in 
check, and for the time being act through the body of that 
man. That is done by the Yogi coming to this discrimination of 
PuruSa and nature. If he wants to enter another’s body he 
makes a Samyama on that body and enters it, because, not 
only is his Soul omnipresent, but his mind also, according to 



113 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the Yogi. It is one bit of the universal mind. Now, however, it 
can only work through the nerve currents in this body, but 
when the Yogi has loosened himself from these nerve 
currents, he will be able to work through other things. 

40. II II 

udanajayajjalapangkakantakadishvasangg 

utkrantishch 

By conquering the current called Udana the Yogi 
does not sink in water, or in swamps, and he can walk 
on thorns. 

Udana is the name of the nerve current that governs the lungs, 
and all the upper parts of the body, and when he is master of it 
he becomes light in weight. He cannot sink in water; he can 
walk on thorns and sword baldes, and stand in fire, and so on. 

41. II V? II 

samanajayat prajvalanam 

By the conquest of the current Samana he is 
surrounded by blaze. 

Whenever he likes light flashes from his body. 

42. #3*4 II VR II 

shrotrakashayoh sanbandhasanyamad divyan 
shrotram 

By making Samyama on the relation between the ear 

114 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



and the Akasa comes divine hearing. 

There is the Akasa, the ether, and the instrument, the ear. By 
making Sarny ama on them the Yogi gets divine hearing; he 
hears everything. Anything spoken or sounded miles away he 
can here. 

kayakashayoh sanbandhasanyama l 
aghutoolasamapatteshchakashagamanam 

By making Samyama on the relation between the 
Akasa and the body the Yogi becoming light as cotton 
wool goes through the skies. 

This Akasa is the material of this body; it is only Akasa in a 
certain form that has become the body. If the Yogi makes 
Samyama on this Akasa material of his body, it acquires the 
lightness of Akasa, and can go anywhere through the air. 

44. WT%T4^dl fTrWfn^T . cTcb II VV II 

bahirakalpita vrittirmahavideha tatah 
prakashavarannakshayah 

By making Samyama on the real modifications of the 
mind, which are outside, called great disembodiness, 
comes disappearance of the covering to light. 

The mind in its foolishness thinks that it is working in this 
body. Why should I be bound by one system of nerves, and 
put the Ego only in one body, if the mind is omnipresent? 



115 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



There is no reason why I should. The Yogi wants to feel the 
Ego wherever he likes. When he has succeeded in that all 
covering to light goes away, and all darkness and ignorance 
vanish. Everything appear to him to be full of knowledge. 

45. mil 

sthoolasvaroopasookshmanvayarthavattva 

samyamadbhootajayah 

By making Sarny ama on the elements, beginning with 
the gross, and ending with the superfine, comes 
mastery of the elements. 

The Yogi make Samyama on the elements, first on the gross, 
and then on the finer states. This Samyama is taken up more 
by a sect of the Buddhists. They take a lump of clay, and make 
Samyama on that, and gradually they begin to see the fine 
materials of which is is composed, and when they have known 
all the fine materials in it, they get power over that element. 
So with all the elements, the Yogi can conquer them all. 




tatoanimadipradurbhavah kayasanpat 
taddharmanabhighatashch 

From that comes minuteness, and the rest of the 
powers, “glorification of the body,” and 
indestructibleness of the bodily qualities. 

This means that the Yogi has attained the eight powers. He can 



116 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



make himsef as light as a particle, he can make himself huge, 
as heavy as the earth, or as light as the air; he will rule 
everything he wants, he will conquer everything he wants, 
alion will sit at his feet like a lamb, and all his desires be 
fulfilled at will. 

47. II ^ II 

roopalavanyabalavajrasanhananatvani kayasanpat 

The glorifications of the body are beauty, 
complexion, strength, adamantine hardness. 

The body becomes indestructible; fire cannot injure it. 
Nothing can injure it. Nothing can destroy it until the Yogi 
wishes. “Breaking the rod of time he lives in this universe 
with his body.” In the Vedas it is written that for that man 
there is no more disease, death or pain. 

48. II VC II 

grahannasvaroopasmitanvayarthavattvasanyamad 

indriyajayah 

By making Sarny ama on the objectivity, knowledge 
and egoism of the organs, by gradation comes the 
conquest of the organs. 

In perception of external objects the organs leave their place 
in the mind and go towards the object; that is followed by 
knowledge and egoism. When the Yogi makes Samyama on 
these by gradation he conquers the organs. Take up anything 
that you see or feel, a book, for instance, and first concentrate 



117 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the mind on the thing itself. Then on the knowledge that it is 
in the form of a book, and then the Ego that sees the book. By 
that practice all the organs will be conquers. 

49. clcTT -HHMNrd II V8, II 

tato manojavitvan vikarannabhavah 
pradhanajayashch 

From that comes glorified mind, power of the organs 
independently of the body, and conquest of nature. 

Just as by the conquest of the elements comes glorified body, 
so from the conquest of the mind will come glorified mind. 

50. j-m 'F b n i ^ d ^ n v n 

sattvapurushanyatakhyatimatrasy 
sarvabhavadhishthatritvam sarvajnatritvan cha 
By making Sarny ama on the Sattva, to him who has 
discriminated between the intellect and the PuruSa 
comes omnipresence and omniscience. 

When we have conquered nature, and realised the difference 
between the PuruSa and nature, that the PuruSa is 
indestructible, pure and perfect, when the Yogi has realised 
this, then comes omnipotence and omniscience. 

51. II II 

tadvairajnadapi doshabijakshaye kaivalyam 

By giving up even these comes the destruction of the 
very seed of evil; he attains Kaivalya. 

118 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



He attains aloneness, independence. Then that man is free. 
When he gives up even the ideas of omnipotence and 
omniscience, there will be entire rejection of enjoyment, of 
the temptations from celestial beings. When the Yogi has seen 
all these wonderful powers, and rejected them, he reaches the 
goal. What are all these powers? Simply manifestations. They 
areno better than dreams. Even omnipotence is a dream. It 
depends on the mind. So long as there is a mind it can be 
understood, but the goal is beyond even the mind. 

sthanyupanimantrane sanggasmayakarannan 
punah anishtaprasanggat 

The Yogi should not feel allured or flattered by the 
overtures of celestial beings, for fear of evil again. 
There are other dangers too; gods and other beings come to 
tempt the Yogi. They do not want anyone to be perfectly free. 
They are jealous, just as we are, and worse than we 
sometimes. They are very much afraid of losing their places. 
Those Yogis who do not reach perfection die and become 
gods; leaving the direct road they go into one of the side 
streets, and get these powers. Then again they have to be born; 
but he who is strong enough to withstand these temptations, 
and go straight to the goal, becomes free. 

53. II ^ II 

kshannatatkramayoh sanyamadavivekajam jnanam 
By making Samyama on a particle of time and its 



119 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



multiples comes discrimination. 

How are we to avoid all these things, these Devas, and 
heavens, and powers? By discrimination, by knowing good 
from evil. Therefore a Samyama is given by which the 
power of discrimination can be strengthened. This is by 
making Samyama on a particle of time. 

54. ri^ddKHd: SfTcNTrT: II II 

jatilakshannadeshairanyataanavachchhedat 
tulyayostatah pratipattih 

Those which cannot be differentiated by species, sign 
and place, even they will be discriminated by the 
above Samyama. 

The misery that we suffer comes from ignorance, from non- 
discrimination between the real and the unreal. We all take the 
bad for the good, the dream for the reality. Soul is the only 
reality, and we have forgotten it. Body is an unreal dream, and 
we think we are all bodies. This non-discrimination is the 
cause of misery, and it is caused by ignorance. When 
discrimination comes it brings strength, and then alone can 
we avoid all these various ideas of body, heavens, and gods 
and Devas. This ignorance arises through differentiating by 
species, sign or place. For instance, take a cow. The cow is 
differentiated from the dog, as species. Even with the cows 
alone how do we make the distinction between one cow and 
another? By signs. If two objects are exactly similar they can 
be distinguished if they are in different places. When objects 
are so mixed up that even these differentiae will not help us, 



120 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



the power of discrimination acquired by the above-mentioned 
practice will give us the ability to distinguish them. The 
highest philosophy of the Yogi is based upon this fact, that the 
PuruSa is pure and perfect, and is the only “simple” that 
exists in this universe. The body and mind are compounds, 
and yet we are ever identifying ourselves with them. That is 
the great mistake that the distinction has been lost. When this 
power of discrimination has been attained, man sees that 
everything in this world, mental and physical, is a compound, 
and, as such, cannot be the PuruSa. 

55. TpfTW fTHHIl II 

tarakan sarvavishayan sarvathavishayam akraman 
cheti vivekajan jnanam 

The saving knowledge is that knowledge of 
discrimination which covers all objects, all means. 

Saving, because the knowledge takes the Yogi across the 
ocean of birth and death. The whole of Prakriti in all its states, 
subtle and gross, is within the grasp of this knowledge. There 
is no succession in perfection by this knowledge: it takes in all 
things simultaneously, at a glance. 

56. II ^ II 

sattvapurushayoh shuddhisamye kaivalyam iti 

By the similarity of purity between the Sattva and the 
PuruSa comes Kaivalya. 

When the soul realises that it depends on nothing in the 

121 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



universe, from gods to the lowest atom, that it is called 
Kaivalya (isolation) and perfection. It is attained when this 
mixture of purity and impurity called mind has been made as 
pure as the PuruSa Itself; then the Sattva, the mind, reflects 
only the unqualified essence of purity, which is the PuruSa 



122 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



CHAPTER IY - KAI VALYA PADA 

INDEPENDENCE 

|| II 



II ? II 

janmaushadhimantratcipahsamadhijah siddhayah 

The Siddhis (powers) are attained by birth, chemical 
means, power of words, mortification or 
concentration. 

Sometimes a man is born with the Siddhis, powers, of course 
from the exercise of powers he had in his previous birth. In 
this birth he is born, as it were, to enjoy the fruits of them. It is 
said of Kapila , the great father of the Sankhya Philosophy, 
that he was a born Siddha, which means, literally, a man who 
has attained to success. 

The Yogis claim that these powers can be gained by chemical 
means. All of you know that chemistry originally began as 
alchemy; men went in search of the philsopher’s stone, and 
elixirs of life, and so forth. In Inidia there was a sect called the 
Rasayanas. Their idea was that ideality, knowledge, 
spirituality and religion, were all very right, but that the body 
was the only instrument by which to attain to all these. If the 
body broke now and then it would take so much more time to 
attain to the goal. For instance, a man wants to practice 
Yoga, or wants to become spiritual. Before he has advanced 
very far he dies. Then he takes another body and begins again, 

123 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



then dies, and so on, and in this way much time will be lost in 
dying and in being born again. If the body could be made 
strong and perfect, so that it would get rid of birth and death, 
we should have so much more time to become spiritual. So 
these Rasayanas say, first make the body very strong, and 
they claim that this body can be made immortal. The idea is 
that if the mind is manufacturing the body, and if it be true 
that each mind is only one particular outlet to that infinite 
energy, and that there is no limit to each particular outlet 
getting any amount of power from outside, why is it 
impossible that we should keep our bodies all the time? We 
shall have to manufacture all the bodies that we shall ever 
have. As soon as this body dies we shall have to manufacture 
another. If we can do that why cannot we do it just here and 
no, without getting out? The theory is perfectly correct. If it is 
possible that we live after death, and make other bodies, why 
is it impossible that we should have the power of making 
bodies here, without entirely dissolving this body, simply 
changing it continually? They also thought that in mercury 
and in sulphur was hidden the most wonderful power, and that 
by certain preparations of these a man could keep the body as 
long as he liked. Others believed that certain drugs could 
bring powers, such as flying through the air, etc. Many of 
the most wonderful medicines of the present day we owe to 
the Rasayamas, notably the use of metals in medicine. 
Certain sects of Yogis claim that many of their principal 
teachers are still living in their old bodies. Patanjali, the great 
authority on Yoga, does not deny this. 

The power of words. There are certain sacred words called 



124 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



Mantrams, which have power, when repeated under proper 
conditions, to produce these extraordinary powers. We are 
living in the midst of such a mass of miracles, day and night, 
that we do not think anything of them. There is no limit to 
man’s power, the power of words and the power of mind. 

Mortification. You will find that in every religion 
mortifications and asceticisms have been practised. In these 
religious conceptions the Hindus always go to the extremes. 
You will find men standing with their hands up all their lives, 
until their hands wither and die. Men sleep standing, day and 
night, until their feet swell, and, if they live, the legs become 
so stiff in this position that they can no more bend them, but 
have to stand all their lives. I once saw a man who had raised 
his hands in this way, and I asked him how it felt when he did 
it first. He said it was awful torture. It was such torture that he 
had to go to a river and put himself in water, and that allayed 
the pain for a little. After a month he did not suffer much. 
Through such practices powers ( Siddhis ) can be attained. 

Concentration. The concentration is Samadhi, and that is 
Yoga proper; that is the principle theme of this science, and it 
is the highest means. The preceding ones are only secondary, 
and we cannot attain to the highest through them. Samadhi is 
the means through which we can gain anything and 
everything, mental, moral or spiritual. 

2. II R II 

jatyantamparinamah prakrityapoorat 

The change into another species is by the filling in of 

125 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



nature. 

Patanjali has advanced the proposition that these powers 
come by first, sometimes by chemical means, or they may be 
got by mortification and he has admitted that this body can be 
kept for any length of time. Now he goes on to state what is 
the cause of the change of the body into another species, 
which he says is by the filling in of nature. In the next 
aphorism he will explain this. 

3. clcT: 3. II 

nimittam aprayojakan prakritinan varannabhedastu 
tatah kshetrikavat 

Good deeds, etc., are not the direct causes in the 
transformation of nature, but they act as breakers of 
obstacles to the evolutions of nature, as a farmer 
breaks the obstacles to the course of water, which 
then runs down by its own nature. 

When a farmer is irrigating his field the water is already in the 
canals, only there are gates which keep the water in. The 
farmer opens these gates, and the water flows in by itself, by 
the law of gravitation. So, all human progress and power are 
already in everything; this perfection is every man’s nature, 
only it is barred in and prevented from taking its proper 
course. If anyone can take the bar off in rushes nature. Then 
the man attains the powers which are his already. Those we 
called wicked become saints, as soon as the bar is broken and 
nature rushes in. It is nature that is driving us towards 
perfection, and eventually she will bring everyone there. All 

126 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



these practices and struggles to become religious are only 
negative work to take off the bars, and open the doors to that 
perfection which is our birthright, our nature. 

To-day the evolution theories of the Yogis will be better 
understood in the light of modern research. And yet the theory 
of the Yogis is a better explanation. The two causes of 
evolution advanced by the moderns, viz., sexual selection and 
survival of the fittest, are inadequate. Suppose human 
knowledge to have advanced too much as to eliminate 
competition, both from the function of acquiring physical 
sustenance and of acquiring a mate. Then, according to the 
moderns, human progress will stop and the race will die. And 
the result of this theory is to furnish every oppressor with an 
argument to calm the qualms of conscience, and men are not 
lacking, who, posing as philosophers, want to kill out all 
wicked and incompetent persons (they are, of course, the only 
judges of competency), and thus preserve the human race! 
But the great ancient evolutionist, Patanjali , declares that the 
true secret of evolution is the manifestation of the perfection 
which is already in every being; that this perfection has been 
barred, and the infinite tide behind it is struggling to express 
itself. These struggles and competitions are but the results of 
our ignorance, because we do not know the proper way to 
unlock the gate and let the water in. This infinite tide behind 
must express itself, and it is the cause of all manifestation, not 
competition for life, or sex gratification, which are only 
momentary, unnecessary, extraneous effects, caused by 
ignorance. Even when all competition has ceased this perfect 
nature behind will make us go forward until everyone has 
become perfect. Therefore there is no reason to believe that 

127 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



competition is necessary to progress. In the animal the man 
was suppressed, but, as soon as the door was opened, out 
rushed man. So, in man there is the potential god, kept in by 
the locks and bars of ignorance. When knowledge breaks 
these bars the god becomes manifest. 

4. II V II 

nirmannachittanyasmitamatrat 

From egoism alone proceed the created minds. 

The theory of Karma is that we suffer for our good or bad 
deeds, and the whole scope of philosophy is to approach the 
glory of man. All the Scriptures sing the glory of man, of the 
soul, and then, with the same breath, they preach this Karma. 
A good deed brings such a result, and a bad deed such a result, 
but, if the soul can be acted upon by a good or a bad deed it 
amounts to nothing. Bad deeds put a bart to the manifestation 
of our nature, of the PuruSa, and good deeds take the 
obstacles off, and its glory becomes manifest. But the PuruSa 
itself is never changed. Whatever you do never destroys 
your own glory, your own nature, because the soul cannot be 
acted upon by anything, only a veil is spread before it, hiding 
its perfection. 

5. SbfTrfRt II II 

pravrittibhede prayojakam chittam ekam anekesham 

Though the activities of the different created minds 
are various, the one original mind is the controller of 
them all. 



128 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



These different minds, which will act in these different 
bodies, are called made-minds, and the bodies made-bodies; 
that is, manufactured bodies and minds. Matter and mind are 
like two inexhaustible storehouses. When you have become a 
Yogi you have learned the secret of their control. It was yours 
all the time, but you had forgotten it. When you become a 
Yogi you recollect it. Then you can do anything with it, 
manipulate it any way you like. The material out of which that 
manufactured mind is created is the very same material which 
is used as the macrocosm. It is not that mind is one thing and 
matter another, but they are different existences of the same 
thing. Asmita, egoism, is the material, the fine state of 
existence out of which these made-minds and made-bodies of 
the Yogi will be manufactured. Therefore, when the Yogi has 
found the secret of these energies of nautre he can 
manufacture any number of bodies, or minds, but they will all 
be manufactures out of the substance known as egoism. 

6. cf=T II 5 II 

tatra dhyanajam anashayam 

Among the various Chittas that which is attained by 
Samadhi is desireless. 

Among all the various minds that we see in various men, only 
that mind which has attained to Samadhi, perfect 
concentration, is the highest. A man who has attained certain 
powers through medicines, or through words, or through 
mortifications, still has desires, but that man who has attained 
to Samadhi through concentration is alone free from all 
desires. 



129 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



7. #R: II vs II 

karmashuklakrishnnam yoginah trividham itaresham 

Works are neither black nor white for the Yogis', for 
others they are threefold, black, white, and mixed. 

When the Yogi has attained to that state of perfection, the 
actions of that man, and the Karma produced by those actions, 
will not bind him, because he did not desire them. He just 
works on: he works to do good, and he does good, but does 
not care for the result, and it will not come to him. But for 
ordinary men, who have not attained to that highest state, 
works are of three kind, black (evil actions), white (good 
actions), and mixed. 

8. ddWldMl^lTi J i u IMIH.b^H^f^dlHHMI^ II II 

tatastadvipakanugunanam evabhivyaktirvasananam 

From these threefold works are manifested in each 
state only those desires (which are) fitting to that state 
alone. (The others are held in abeyance for the time 
being.) 

Suppose I have made the three kinds of Karma, good, bad, 
and mixed; and suppose I die and become a god in heaven; the 
desires in a god body are not the same as the desires in a 
human body. The god body neither eats nor drinks; what 
becomes of my past unworked Karmas, which produce as 
their effect the desire to eat and drink? Where would these 
Karmas go when I became a god? The answer is that desires 



130 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



can only manifest themselves in proper environments. Only 
those desires will come out for which the environment is 
fitted; the rest will remain stored up. In this life we have many 
godly desires, many human desires, many animal desires. If I 
take a god body, only the god desires will come up, because 
for them the environments are suitable. And if I take an 
animal body, only the animal desires will come up, and the 
god desires will wait. What does that show? That by means 
of environment we can check these desires. Only that Karma 
which is suited to and fitted for the environments will come 
out. These proves that the power of environment is the great 
check to control even Karma itself. 

9. f^ldElVbKdl: 

II <01 

jatideshakalavyavahitanam apyanantaryam 
smritisanskarayoh ekaroopatvat 

There is connectiveness in desire, even though 
separated by speices, space and time, there being 
identifi-cation of memory and impressions. 

Experiences becoming fine become impressions; impressions 
revivified become memory. The word memory here includes 
unconscious co-ordination of past experience, reduced to 
impressions, with present conscious action. In each body the 
group of impressions acquired in a similar body only will 
become the cause of action in that body. The experiences of 
dissimilar bodies will be held in abeyance. Each body will act 
as if it were a descendant of a series of bodies of that species 

131 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



only; thus, consecutiveness of desires will not be broken. 

10. cTT^SRn^l THcdcdlcf II ?° || 

tasam anaditvam chcishisho nityatvat 

Thirst for happiness being eternal, desires are without 
beginning. 

All experience is preceded by desire for becoming happy. 
There was no beginning of experience, as each fresh 
experience is built upon the tendency generated by past 
experience; therefore desire is without beginning. 



11. TPlCldcdld TTB'TRR II?? II 

hetufalashrayalambanaih sangrihitatvad esham 
abhave tadabhavah 

Being held together by cause, effect, support, and 
objects, in the absence of these is its absence. 

These desires are held together by cause and effect; if a desire 
has been raised it does not die without producing its effect. 
Then again, the mind-stuff is the great storehouse, the support 
of all past desires, reduced to Samskara form; until they have 
worked themselves out they will not die. Moreover, so long as 
the senses receive the external objects fresh desires will arise. 
If it be possible to get rid of these, then alone desires will 
vanish. 

12. 31d!dMMd WWWi m II 

atitanagatan svaroopatostyadhvabhedad 



132 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



dharmanam 

The past and future exist in their own nature, qualities 
having different ways. 

13. ^ fJtillrHM: IIUII 

te vyciktasookshma gunatmanah 

They are manifested or fine, being of the nature of the 

Gunas. 

The Gunas are the three substances, Sattva , Rajas, and 
Tamas, whose gross state is the sensible universe. Past and 
future arise from the different modes of manifestation of these 
Gunas. 

14. II II 

parinamaikatvad vastutattvam 
The unity in things is from the unity in changes. 
Though there are three substances their changes 
being co-ordinated all objects have their unity. 

15. d^ll^ T^fT: II U II 

vastusamye chittabhedat tayorvibliaktah panthah 
The object being the same, perception and desire vary 
according to the various minds. 



133 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



16. d^lMTO^fNrl^ ^ ^Idl^lIdH, II ? $ II 3 

taduparagapekshatvat chittasya vastu jnatajnatam 

Things are known or unknown to the mind, being 
de-pendent on the colouring which they give to the 
mind. 

17. ^1#1PI^ II II 

sada jnatashchittavrittayastatprabhoh 
purushasyaparinamitvat 

The states of the mind are always known because the 
lord of the mind is unchangeable. 

The whole gist of this theory is that the universe is both 
mental and material. And both the mental and material worlds 
are in a continuous state of flux. What is this book? 

It is a combination of molecules in constant change. One lot is 
going out, and another coming in; it is a whirlpool, but what 
makes the unity? What makes it the same book? The changes 
are rhythmical; in harmonious order they are sending 
impressions to my mind, and these pieced together make a 
continuous picture, although they parts are continuously 



3 Swami Vivekananda does not comment on the sutra which is 16 th sutra 
in most versions of Patanjali Yoga Sutra. This sutra is: n 

T% II "An object exists independent of its cognizance by 
any one consciousness. What happens to it when that consciousness is 
not there to perceive it?” 



134 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



changing. Mind itself is continuously changing. The mind and 
body are like two layers in the same substance, moving at 
different rates of speed. Relatively, one being slower and the 
other quicker, we can distinguish between the two motions. 
For instance, a train is moving, and another carriage is 
moving slowly alongside it. It is possible to find the motion of 
both these, to a certain extent. But still something else is 
necessary. Motion can only be perceived when there is 
something else which is not moving. But when two or three 
things are relatively moving, we first perceive the motion of 
the faster one, and then that of the slower ones. How is the 
mind to perceive? It is also in a flux. Therefore another thing 
is necessary which moves more slowly, then you must get to 
something in which the motion is still slower, and so on, and 
you will find no end. Therefore logic compels you to stop 
somewhere. You must complete the series by knowing 
something which never changes. Behind this never ending 
chain of motion is the PuruSa, the changeless, the colourless, 
the pure. All these impressions are merely reflected upon it, as 
rays of light from a camera are reflected upon a white sheet, 
painting hundreds of pictures on it, without in any way 
tarnishing the sheet. 

18 . H II ?£ II 

na tat svabhasandrishyatvat 

Mind is not self-luminous, being an object. 

Tremendous power is manifested everywhere in nature, but 
yet something tells us that it is not self-luminous, not 
essentially intelligent. The PuruSa alone is self-luminous, and 



135 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



gives its light to everything. It is its power that is percolating 
through all matter and force. 

19. WWd %FIHddK<J|^ || ^ || 

ekasamaye chobhayanavadharannam 

From its being unable to cognise two things at the 
same time. 

If the mind were self-luminous it would be able to cognise 
everything at the same time, which it cannot. If you pay deep 
attention to one thing you lose another. If the mind were 
self-luminous there would be no limit to the impressions it 
could receive. The PuruSa can cognise all in one moment; 
therefore the PuruSa is self-luminous, and the mind is not. 

20. HTh-rHm F^TFbRSl II Ro || 

chittantaradrishye buddhibuddheratiprasanggah 
smritisankarashcha 

Another cognising mind being assumed there will be 
no end to such assumptions and confusion of 
memory. 

Let us suppose that there is another mind which cognises the 
first, there will have to be something which cognises that, and 
so there will be no end to it. It will result in confusion of 
memory, there will be no storehouse of memory. 

21. HdiMId^FNIW^I'FKN-dl IR? II 



136 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



chiterapratisankramayastadakarapattau 

svabuddhisanvedanam 

The essence of knowledge (the PuruSa) being 
un-changeable, when the mind takes its form, it 
becomes conscious. 

Patanjali says this to make it more clear that knowledge is not 
a quality of the PuruSa. When the mind comes near the 
PuruSa it is reflected, as it were, upon the mind, and the mind, 
for the time being, becomes knowing and seems as if it were 
itself the PuruSa. 

22. sfswrcrfc ntt II RR II 

drashtridrishyoparaktan chittan sarvartham 

Coloured by the seer and the seen the mind is able to 
understand everything. 

On the one side the external world, the seen, is being 
reflected, and on the other, the seer is being reflected; thus 
comes the power of all knowledge to the mind. 

23. fcdTIKcdld. II ^ II 

tadasankhyeyavasanachitram api pararthan 
sanhatyakaritvat 

The mind through its innumerable desires acts for 
another (the PuruSa ), being combinations. 

The mind is a compound of various things, and therefore it 
cannot work for itself. Everything that is a combination in this 



137 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



world has some object for that combination, some third thing 
for which this combination is going on. So this combination 
of the mind is for the PuruSa. 

24. HR* II 

vi she shadar shin aatmabhavabhavanavinivrittih 

For the discriminating the perception of the mind as 
Atman ceases. 

Through discrimination the Yogi knows that the PuruSa is not 
mind. 

25. cl^T FM'bkW HrFf II RM, II 

tada vivekanimnan kaivalyapragbharan chittam 

Then bent on discriminating the mind attains the 
previous state of Kaivalya (isolation). 

Thus the practice of Yoga leads to discriminating power, to 
clearness of vision. The veil drops from the eyes, and we see 
things as they are. We find that this nature is a compound, and 
is showing the panorama for the PuruSa , who is the witness; 
that this nature is not the Lord, that the whole of these 
combinations of nature are simply for the sake of showing 
these phenomena to the PuruSa , the enthroned king within. 
When discrimination comes by long practice fear ceases, and 
the mind attains isolation. 

26. McM4l«r1TTM IIR^II 

tachchhidreshu pratyayantarani sanskarebhyah 

138 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



The thoughts that arise as obstructions to that are 
from impressions. 

All the various ideas that arise making us belive that we 
require something external to make us happy are obstructions 
to that perfection. The PuruSa is happiness and blessedness 
by its own nature. But that knowledge is covered over by past 
impressions. These impressions have to work themselves out. 



27. fTRRT II ^ II 

hanam esham kleshavaduktam 

Their destruction is in the same manner as of 

ignorance, etc., as said before. 

28 . WWi: II ^ II 

prasankhyanepyakusidasy sarvathavivekakhyater 
dharmameghah samadhih 

Even when arriving at the right discriminating 
knowledge of the senses, he who gives up the fruits, 
unto him comes as the result of perfect 
discrimination, the Samadhi called the cloud of 
virtue. 

When the Yogi has attained to this discrimination, all these 
powers will come that were mentioned in the last chapter, but 
the true Yogi rejects them all. Unto him comes a peculiar 
knowledge, a particular light called the Dharma Megha, the 
cloud of virtue. All the great prophets of the world whom 
history has recorded had this. They had found the whole 



139 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



foundation of knowledge within themselves. Truth to them 
had become real. Peace and calmness, and perfect purity 
became their own nature, after they had given up all these 
vanities of powers. 

29. cTcT: II Wl 

tatah kleshakarmanivrittih 

From that comes cessation of pains and works. 

When that cloud of virtue has come, then no more is there fear 
of falling, nothing can drag the Yogi down. No more will there 
be evils for him. No more pains. 

30. dTT Uc||cRU|H<AlQdW SIFTF II II 

tada sarvavarannamalapetasy 
jnanasyaanantyajgyeyam alpam 

Then knowledge, bereft of covering and impurities, 
becoming infinite, the knowable becomes small. 

Knowledge itself is there; its covering is gone. One of the 
Buddhistic scriptures sums up what is meant by the Buddha 
(which is the name of a state). It defines it as infinite 
knowledge, infinite as the sky. Jesus attained to that state and 
became the Christ. All of you will attain to that state, and 
knowledge becoming infinite, the knowable becomes small. 
This whole universe, with all its knowable, becomes as 
nothing before the PuruSa. the ordinary man thinks himself 
very small, because to him the knowable seems to be so 
infinite. 



140 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



31. cTcfi ^cTT^ WWW 

tatah kritarthanan parinamakramapari 
samaptirgunanam 

Then are finished the successive transformations of 
the qualities, they having attained the end. 

Then all these various transformations of the qualities, which change 
from species to species, cease forever. 

32. ^NlddMl TR u IIHNiMMiJld: TO II XR II 

kshannapratiyogi parinamaparantanigrarhyah 
kramah 

The changes that exist in relation to moments, and 
which are perceived at the other end (at the end of a 
series) are succession. 

Patanjali here defines the word succession, the changes that 
exist in relation to moments. While I am thinking, many 
moments pass, and with each moment there is a change of 
idea, but we only perceive these changes at the end of a series. 
So, perception of time is always in the memory. This is called 
succession, but for the mind that has realised omnipresence 
all these have finished. Everything has become present for 
it; the present alone exists, the past and future are lost. This 
stands controlled, and all knowledge is there in one second. 
Everything is known like a flash. 



141 




Patanjali Yoga Sutras 



33. TpTRT %^q , 3T 

MMAlRbild II ^ II 

purusharthashoonyanan gunanan pratiprasavah 
kaivalyan, svaroopapratishtha va chitishaktireti 

The resolution in the inverse order of the qualities, 
berfect of any motive of action for the PuruSa, is 
Kaivalya, or it is the establishment of the power of 
knowledge in its own nature. 

Nature’s task is done, this unselfish task which our sweet 
nurse Nature had imposed upon herself. As it were, she 
gently took the self-forgetting soul by the hand, and showed 
him all the experiences in the universe, all manifestations, 
bringing him higher and higher through various bodies, till his 
glory came back, and he remembered his own nature. Then 
the kind mother went back the way she came, for others who 
have also lost their way in the trackless desert of life. And 
thus she is working, without beginning and without end. And 
thus through pleasure and pain, through good and evil, the 
infinite river of souls is flowing into the ocean of perfection, 
of self-realisation. 

Glory unto those who have realised their own nature! May 
their blessings be on us all! 



142 




